There have been several rounds of peace talks to halt Russia's 2022 invasion in Ukraine and end the Russo-Ukrainian War in an armistice.


The first meeting was held four days after the start of the invasion, on 28 February 2022, in Belarus.


It concluded without result, with delegations from both sides returning to their capitals for consultations.


A second and third round of talks took place on 3 and 7 March 2022, on the Belarus–Ukraine border, in an undisclosed location in the Gomel region of Belarus.


A fourth and fifth round of talks were respectively held on 10 and 14 March in Antalya, Turkey.


Peace talks and the stability of international borders were further discussed in the Ukrainian parliament during the week of 9 May.


Following the 2022 Ukrainian eastern counteroffensive, Russia renewed calls for peace talks.


Ukrainian leaders refused to reopen dialogue, claiming that the Russian government was not truly committed to peace and was simply stalling for time while its forces regrouped.


Background ==
Russia was a signatory to the 1994 Budapest Memorandum political agreement, providing security assurances to Ukraine.


Russia reaffirmed this assurance in 2009.


After the Russian occupation of Crimea began in 2014, Putin claimed that the Revolution of Dignity had created a new political entity and any prior agreement with Ukraine was therefore void.


Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has repeatedly engineered frozen conflicts to block the expansion of NATO or the European Union into the former Soviet sphere of influence.


Conflicts are deemed "frozen" when fighting has stopped but no political resolution has been achieved.


In 2014, Russia orchestrated separatist movements in Ukraine, and Russian proxy forces began the Donbas war.


After Ukraine recovered significant territory up to August 2014, Russia intervened with conventional forces, leading to negotiated ceasefires through the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015.


These ceasefires had potential to freeze the conflict, but sporadic offensives by Russia-backed separatists continued.


Although Russia was a party to the Minsk agreements, it later denied any obligations, claiming to have only been a mediator between Ukraine and separatist forces.


On 24 February 2022, Russia began the Russian invasion of Ukraine as an escalation of the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War.


Negotiations


Peace negotiations: First phase of invasion (24 February to 7 April 2022) ===
Deputy Kremlin Chief of Staff Dmitry Kozak said in 2022 that he had negotiated an agreement with Ukraine within a few days of the invasion.


This settlement would have ended hostilities in exchange for guarantees that Ukraine would not join NATO; however, Putin rejected it as his aims had shifted to annexation.


A Kremlin spokesman denied the story.


First round (28 February) ====
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko agreed on 27 February that a Ukrainian delegation would meet with Russian officials on the Belarusian border, near the Pripyat River, without preconditions.


It was reported that Lukashenko assured Zelenskyy that all planes, helicopters, and missiles on Belarusian territory would remain on the ground during the negotiations.


Talks began on 28 February, near the Belarusian border.


The Ukrainian president's office said that the main goals were to call for an immediate ceasefire, and for Russian troops to be withdrawn from Ukraine.


It concluded with no immediate agreements.


Second round (3 March) ====
On 3 March, the second round of peace talks began.


Both sides agreed to open humanitarian corridors for evacuating civilians.


Russia's demands were Ukraine's recognition of Russian-occupied Crimea, independence for separatist-controlled Luhansk and Donetsk, and "de-militarisation" and "de-Nazification".


Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba stated that while his country was ready for talks to resume, Russia's demands had not changed.


On 5 March, Naftali Bennett flew to Moscow and held three hours of meetings with Putin, then flew to Germany and held meetings with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz.


Bennett spoke in advance with Zelenskyy, who had previously asked for his help mediating.


He also coordinated with the US, France and Germany.


According to Al Monitor, the meetings were instigated by Scholz who made a brief visit to Israel on 3 March and held a long one-on-one meeting with Bennett, which produced the mediation idea.


Bennett said in 2023 that both sides had wanted a ceasefire, the odds of the deal holding had been 50-50, and that the Western powers backing Ukraine had blocked the deal.


Later he expressed doubts regarding the desirability of such a deal.


On 6 March, Ukrainian official Denys Kireyev was found dead after being accused of committing ‘treason’ and working for Russia.


Barely a week after attending the first round of peace talks, images of Kireev’s corpse began circulating.


Third round (7 March) ====
A third round of negotiations began on 7 March, amidst ongoing fighting and bombing.


Dmitry Peskov restated Moscow's demands, that Ukraine should agree to change its constitution to enshrine neutrality, accept that the Crimea was Russian territory, and recognize Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states; he claimed that Russia was ready to halt military operations "in a moment" if Kyiv agreed to these conditions.


Although a deal had not been reached yet, Ukrainian negotiator and advisor to the president Mykhailo Podoliak tweeted that "there were some small positive shifts regarding logistics of humanitarian corridors."


However, the day before, a Ukrainian negotiator was shot amid claims of spying for Russia.


Antalya Diplomacy Forum (10 March) ====
On 10 March, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba met for talks in Antalya, Turkey with Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu as mediator, in the first high-level contact between the two sides since the beginning of the invasion.


Ukraine had attempted to negotiate a 24-hour ceasefire to provide aid and evacuation to civilians, especially in Mariupol.


After two hours of talks, no agreement was reached.


Airstrikes on the port city continued.


Fourth round (14–17 March) ====
The fourth round of negotiations began on 14 March via video conference.


The talks lasted a few hours and ended without a breakthrough.


The two sides resumed talks on 15 March, after which Volodymyr Zelenskyy described the talks as beginning to "sound more realistic".By 16 March, Mykhailo Podoliak was assigned as the chief negotiator for the Ukrainian peace delegation, who indicated that peace negotiations of a 15-point plan would involve the retraction of Russian forces from their advanced positions in Ukraine, along with international guarantees for military support and alliance in case of renewed Russian military action, in return for Ukraine not pursuing further affiliation with NATO.The two sides again resumed talks on 16 March.


Later that day, the Financial Times reported that a 15-point plan, first discussed on 14 March, negotiated with the Russians was being identified by Zelenskyy as more realistic for ending the war.


After the fourth day of talks on 17 March, Russia said an agreement has not been reached.


Following the talks, French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian warned that Russia was only "pretending to negotiate", in line with a strategy it has used elsewhere.


On 20 March, Turkey's Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, the mediator of the talks, described them as "making progress".


Referring to his role as "an honest mediator and facilitator", he gave little further detail.


Following his address to the Israeli parliament, Zelenskyy thanked Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett for his efforts in encouraging peace talks, and suggested that they might take place in Jerusalem.


Fifth round (21 March) ====
The fifth round of talks, on 21 March, failed to achieve a breakthrough.


Zelenskyy called for direct talks with Putin to end the war.


Sergey Lavrov said direct talks between the two presidents would only go ahead once both sides are closer to reaching a settlement.


Renewal of peace talks: 29–30 March ====
On 28 March, Zelenskyy confirmed that a renewal of peace talk negotiations with Russia would start in Istanbul on 29 March, with the intention of discussing Ukrainian neutrality, along with the repudiation of any claims for Ukrainian NATO membership in the future.


On 29 March, Estonian Prime Minister, Kaja Kallas, indicated in agreement with French minister Le Drian that any Russian offers of peaceful negotiation about Ukraine, or withdrawal from Kyiv, should be regarded with diplomatic skepticism, based on a history of Russian unreliability in similar peace negotiations with other countries.


Ahead of the  29 March meeting Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stated that Ukraine was ready to agree to 4 out of Russia’s 6 demands.


He claimed Ukraine was prepared to renounce NATO membership and to make Russian Ukraine's second official language.


According to Erdoğan Ukraine was not prepared to recognise the Russian occupation of Crimea or parts of Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts.


Ukraine proposed adopting a neutral status in exchange for security guarantees along the lines of NATO Article 5.


The proposals also included a 15-year consultation period on the status of Russian-annexed Crimea and return of all Russian forces to their pre-invasion positions.


Russia's Ministry of Defense announced "drastic reduction of military activity" on the Kyiv and Chernihiv fronts, which, Russian presidential aide Vladimir Medinsky clarified, was not tantamount to a ceasefire.


In a televised meeting with military bloggers on 13 June 2023 the Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that Russia and Ukraine had come on that day to "a good agreement on how to resolve the current situation by peaceful means" but then the Ukrainians "threw it away" after the withdrawal of Russian troops from Kyiv following the failed Russian 2022 offensive on Kyiv.


According to Putin, Ukraine had agreed to curb Neo-Nazism in Ukraine through the "introducing appropriate restrictions in the law in Ukraine", but this has failed to happen intentionally.


On 14 June 2023, President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko claimed, in an interview with Russia-1, that Ukrainian and Russian delegations also discussed the possibility of "some sort of a lease" of Crimea during the March 2022 negotiations.


Peace talks: Second phase of invasion (7 April to 5 September)


April 2022 ====
On 7 April, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that the peace deal Ukraine drafted and presented to the Russian government contained "unacceptable" elements.


Lavrov said that the proposal diverged from the terms negotiators had agreed on.


Mykhaylo Podolyak, a negotiator for Ukraine, said that the comments from Lavrov are a tactic to draw attention away from the war crime accusations against Russian forces.


Lastly, Lavrov stated, "Despite all the provocations, the Russian delegation will continue with the negotiation process, pressing for our own draft agreement that clearly and fully outlines our initial and key positions and requirements."According to a May report from Ukrainska Pravda, the Russian side was ready for a meeting between Zelenskyy and Putin, but it later came to a halt after the discovery of War crimes in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, in particular the Bucha massacre.


In a surprise visit to Ukraine on 9 April, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said "Putin is a war criminal, he should be pressured, not negotiated with," and that the collective West was not willing to make a deal with Putin.


Three days after Johnson left Kyiv, Putin stated publicly that talks with Ukraine "had turned into a dead end".


Roman Abramovich visited Kyiv in an attempt to resume negotiations.


Zelenskyy proposed negotiating two separate documents, one being a bilateral agreement between Ukraine and Russia, and the other involving Ukraine and the West.


On 11 April, the Chancellor of Austria, Karl Nehammer, visited and spoke with Putin in Moscow in 'very direct, open and hard' talks which were skeptical of the short-term peaceful resolution of the invasion.


By 26 April, the Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres visited Russia for the purpose of speaking with Putin and Lavrov in separate meetings, and after the meetings with them indicating skepticism as to any short term resolution of differences between Russia and Ukraine largely due to very different respective perspectives on the circumstances of the invasion presently being adopted by each of the two nations.


According to U.S. officials who spoke to Foreign Affairs, a provisional agreement was reached in April, whereby the Russian forces would withdraw to the pre-invasion line and Ukraine would commit not to seek to join NATO in exchange for security guarantees from a number of countries.


However, in a July interview with Russian state media, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov stated that this compromise was no longer an option, saying that even the Donbas was not enough and that the "geography had changed."


May 2022 ====
On 13 May, U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin initiated a telephone conversation with Russian Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu, the first call since 18 February, before the invasion.


The call lasted about an hour with Austin urging an immediate ceasefire.


On 15 May, Putin convened the Collective Security Treaty Organization, consisting of Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Tajikistan, and Belarus, to discuss issues of peace and border security related to Ukraine and NATO.President Zelenskyy denounced suggestions by former US diplomat Henry Kissinger that Ukraine should cede control of Crimea and Donbas to Russia in exchange for peace.


On 25 May, Zelenskyy said that Ukraine would not agree to peace until Russia agreed to return Crimea and the Donbas region to Ukraine.


Zelenskyy stressed that "Ukrainians are not ready to give away their land, to accept that these territories belong to Russia."


He emphasized that Ukrainians own the land of Ukraine.


As of September 2022, these peace negotiations have been frozen indefinitely.


Peace talks: Third phase of invasion (6 September to present)


September 2022 ====
In September, Reuters reported that Kremlin Chief of Staff Dmitry Kozak had an agreement with the Ukrainian side with Ukraine's declaration that it will not join NATO, which was presented as Russia's key concern.


The agreement was however blocked by Putin, who "expanded his objectives to include annexing swathes of Ukrainian territory".


In the same month, Ukraine rejected a peace plan proposed by Mexico.


On 21 September, Zelenskyy addressed the UN General Assembly with a pre-recorded video, laying out five "non-negotiable" conditions for a "peace formula", comprising "just punishment" of Russia for its crimes committed against Ukraine, protection of life by "all available means allowed by the UN charter", restoring security and territorial integrity, security guarantees from other countries, and determination for Ukraine to continue defending itself.


Speaking to Bild, Zelenskyy stated that he saw little chance of holding talks with Putin unless Russia withdrew its forces from Ukrainian territory.


Following Putin's announcement of Russia annexing four regions of Ukrainian territory it had seized during its invasion, Zelenskyy announced that Ukraine would not hold peace talks with Russia while Putin was president.


October 2022 ====
Following the October 2022 missile strikes on Ukraine, China and India, who had abstained from condemning Russia at the UN, expressed concern and called for de-escalation and dialogue.


Turkish President Erdogan expressed some hope for a diplomatic resolution, saying that Putin "is now more open to possible peace talks" and that Kyiv "was not rejecting such peace talks."


The Russian government announced it was ready for a renewed dialogue, and indeed had always been open to negotiating an end to hostilities.


The Ukrainian leadership responded that it did not believe Russia was truly committed to peace, and was simply hoping to stall for time while rebuilding its military capabilities for future offensives.


On 3 October 2022, Elon Musk floated a controversial proposal on Twitter, arguing that Ukraine should permanently cede Crimea to Russia, which would be assured of its water supply from Ukraine, and that Ukraine should drop its bid to join NATO.


The four-part proposal, posted as a Twitter poll, suggested new referendums under UN supervision on the annexation of Russian-occupied territories.


The proposal was welcomed by the Russian government and rebuked by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy as "pro-Russia".


November 2022 ====
In a video address from November 7, Ukrainian President Zelenskyy named conditions for negotiating with Russia: "One more time: restoration of territorial integrity, respect for the U.N. charter, compensation for all material losses caused by the war, punishment for every war criminal and guarantees that this does not happen again."U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Mark Milley urged Ukraine and Russia to find a "political solution", saying that the war in Ukraine is unwinnable by purely military means.


December 2022 ====
In a December 2022 interview with the Associated Press, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba called for a February 2023 peace summit at the UN mediated by secretary-general António Guterres.


He stated that Ukraine would only invite Russia if the country faced an international court for war crimes.


Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that any peace plan can only proceed from Ukraine's recognition of Russia's sovereignty over the regions it annexed from Ukraine in September 2022.On 28 December 2022, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov stated that peace talks with Ukraine would only resume if it recognized Russia's sovereignty over the annexed and partially occupied regions.


January 2023 ====
In January 2023, Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that "there is currently no prospect for diplomatic means of settling the situation around Ukraine."


March 2023 ====
On 14 March 2023, Peskov said "We have to achieve our goals.


Right now this is only possible by military means due to the current position of the Kyiv regime."


April 2023 ====
Andrii Sybiha, deputy head of Zelenskyy’s office, told the Financial Times: "If we will succeed in achieving our strategic goals on the battlefield and when we will be on the administrative border with Crimea, we are ready to open [a] diplomatic page to discuss this issue."In April 2023, Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva suggested that Ukraine should "give up Crimea" to end the war, saying Zelenskyy "can not want everything".


Lula condemned Russia's violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity and said Russia should withdraw from Ukrainian territory it has occupied since February 2022.


He said Brazil advocates a "negotiated political solution to the conflict" and expressed "concern" about the "global consequences" of the war "in terms of food and energy security, especially in the poorest regions of the planet."


Ukraine rejected his proposal to give up Crimea in exchange for peace.


Lula proposed the creation of a "peace club" from a group of developing countries, including Brazil and China, which would try to negotiate peace in Ukraine.


Lula’s foreign policy adviser Celso Amorim said that "[a]s long as there are no talks, the ideal peace for the Ukrainians and the Russians will not happen.


There must be concessions."


Lula declared after a state visit to China that "the United States needs to stop encouraging war and start talking about peace".


U.S. National Security Council spokesman John Kirby responded by accusing Lula of "parroting Russian and Chinese propaganda", describing his comments as "simply misguided" and "suggesting the United States and Europe are somehow not interested in peace, or that we share responsibility for the war".


On 6 April 2023, Oleksiy Danilov, Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine, said about a possible peace agreement between Russia and Ukraine, which would freeze the conflict and leave the annexed territories of Ukraine, including Crimea, in Russia's possession, that "If Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky proposes peace talks between Kyiv and Moscow, he will commit political suicide."On 7 April 2023, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that Russia rejects the "unipolar world order" led by the United States and wants any peace talks with Ukraine to focus on creating a "new world order."On 30 April, Pope Francis announced that the Vatican is taking part in a secret "peace mission" to try to end the war between Russia and Ukraine.


May 2023 ====
In May 2023, UN Secretary-General António Guterres said peace negotiations to end the Russo-Ukrainian War were "not possible at this moment", saying it was clear that Russia and Ukraine "are completely absorbed in this war" and "are convinced that they can win."


On 16 May, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that the leaders of African countries came up with a new initiative for peace in Ukraine.


On 22 May, Denmark foreign minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen said the country was willing to host a summit in July 2023 aimed at "finding peace between Ukraine and Russia" adding that "it is necessary to build interest and involvement from countries like India, Brazil and China."On 22 May, Brazilian President Lula da Silva said that the countries of the Global South, including Brazil, India, Indonesia and China "want peace", but both Putin and Zelenskyy "are convinced that they are going to win the war" and do not want to talk about peace, so the war could be very long.


June 2023 ====
On 3 June, Indonesia's defense minister Prabowo Subianto proposed a multi-point peace plan including a ceasefire and establishing a demilitarised zone observed and monitored by the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces.


He said that a UN referendum should be held "to ascertain objectively the wishes of the majority of the inhabitants of the various disputed areas".


Prabowo's proposal was criticised by EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell.


Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov said that the peace plans presented by China, Brazil and Indonesia are attempts at mediation on behalf of Russia, saying that "they all currently want to be mediators on Russia’s side.


That’s why this sort of mediation currently doesnot fit for us at all because they arenot impartial."


Reznikov said that Ukraine is willing to accept China as a mediator for peace talks between Russia and Ukraine only if Beijing could convince Russia to withdraw from all the territories it has occupied in Ukraine.


In June, a delegation from Africa, including representatives from South Africa, Egypt, Senegal, Congo-Brazzaville, Comoros, Zambia, and Uganda, visited Ukraine and Russia to call for peace.


Both Russia and Ukraine welcomed the African leaders' mission, but Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba warned that "Any peace initiative should respect the territorial integrity of Ukraine, it should not imply, even in-between the lines, any cessation of Ukrainian territory to Russia.


Second, any peace plan should not lead to the freezing of the conflict."


After a meeting with African leaders in Kyiv, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that peace talks with Russia would be possible only after Moscow withdraws its forces from the entire occupied territory.


The African delegation was in Kyiv during a Russian missile strike on the city.


On 17 June, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa and other African leaders met Russian President Vladimir Putin in St. Petersburg.


Ramaphosa told Putin that the war must end, but Putin rejected the delegation's peace plan based on accepting Ukraine's internationally recognized borders.


July 2023 ====
On 29 July, during a meeting with African leaders at the 2023 Russia–Africa Summit in St. Petersburg, Russian President Vladimir Putin rejected a ceasefire and peace talks with Ukraine due to the ongoing Ukrainian counter-offensive against Russian forces in Russia-occupied southeastern Ukraine, saying "We cannot cease fire when we are under attack."


August 2023 ====
On 5 and 6 August 2023 Saudi Arabia hosted multinational peace talks attended by 40 countries (including China) in Jeddah focusing on Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's proposed peace plan.


Russia did not participate in the talks.


Prior  to the summit Andriy Yermak, Zelenskyy’s chief of staff, said there would be discussions on the Ukrainian Peace Formula, which "contains 10 fundamental points, the implementation of which will not only ensure peace for Ukraine, but also create mechanisms to counter future conflicts in the world".


After the summit no joint statement was issued.


The participants did agree to create working groups to develop details of key themes prominent in Zelenskyy's proposed peace plan (that calls for Russian troops to withdraw from all of Ukraine’s territory as part of a peace deal) while a parallel ambassadors group would continue technical work on the issues.


September 2023 ====
On 27 September 2023, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said in an interview with TASS that Russia was "ready to make agreements" on Ukraine if they would "take the situation on the ground" and Russian security interests into account.


According to Lavrov one of the Russian security interest was "the need to prevent the creation of a hostile Nazi regime near Russian borders."


Lavrov also said that Russia did not see "any serious proposals from the West" and he argued that they were promoting Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy ‘peace formula’ as "the sole basis for negotiations" and that there was "no point in discussing it as it is nothing but an ultimatum."


Lavrov also praised the June 2023 African, Arab League (although formally the Arab League never submitted its own peace proposal), Chinese, Brazilian and peace proposals "from other countries" since he claimed "All of them were guided by a sincere desire to facilitate an agreement, which would consider the root causes of the current situation and the need to eliminate them, and will also ensure equal security for all parties."


October 2023 ====
NBC News reported that officials at the 11 October 2023 Ukraine Defense Contact Group meeting began confidential and delicate talks with the Ukrainian officials about what the broad outlines of possible peace negotiations might entail, according to two U.S. participants.


Chinese peace proposal


In February 2023, during a speech at the 59th Munich Security Conference, Chinese foreign policy chief, CCP Politburo member Wang Yi said that CCP general secretary Xi Jinping would present a “peace proposal” to resolve what he described as the "conflict" between Moscow and Kyiv.


At the UN General Assembly marking the anniversary of the invasion, Chinese deputy UN Ambassador proposed China's plan including a ceasefire, dialogue, security guarantees for Russia, protection of civilians and the upholding of territorial integrity, while also insisting that the west was exacerbating the situation by sending weapons to Ukraine.


On Feb 24, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs published as a 12-point position paper on its website titled "China’s Position on the Political Settlement of the Ukraine Crisis", getting mixed responses from Western leaders.


President Zelenskyy stated "I plan to meet Xi Jinping and believe this will be beneficial for our countries and for security in the world", although a time and place for such meeting was not set.


Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova responded saying Russia appreciated Beijing's effort to resolve the conflict by peaceful means but that Russia was "open to achieving the goals of the special military operation by political and diplomatic means" and that it would entail recognising "new territorial realities" in Ukraine, referring to Russia's annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts.


Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that "for now, we donot see any of the conditions that are needed to bring this whole story towards peace."On 7 March 2023, China's Foreign Minister Qin Gang remarked, "the Ukraine crisis seems to be driven by an invisible hand pushing for the protraction and escalation of the conflict."


He insisted that sanctions and political pressure will not solve the problem.


Qin also said Beijing has not provided weapons to either side of the Ukraine conflict.


He added that "the process of peace talks should begin as soon as possible".


The PRC has called for peace negotiations since the conflict began to address the legitimate security concerns of all parties involved.


Prior to his visit to Russia on 20-22 March 2023, Xi Jinping said China's peace proposal to end the Russo-Ukrainian War reflected world opinion.


U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken questioned China's peace proposal, saying "the world should not be fooled by any tactical move by Russia, supported by China or any other country, to freeze the war on its own terms."On 26 April 2023, Chinese leader Xi Jinping called Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, over a month after Xi's summit with Russia's President Vladimir Putin.


According to Steve Tsang, director of the SOAS China Institute in London, "There is no indication that Xi is trying to get Putin or Russia to make concessions of any sort (and) the Chinese readout (of the call) does not include anything concrete that can start a peace process."In May 2023, European officials reportedly criticized China's peace plan as an attempt at "freezing" the conflict in place and splitting the West in pushing Ukraine cease-fire.


Agreements regarding grain exports


Russia and Ukraine signed agreements with Turkey and the United Nations on 22 July 2022, intended to secure exports via the Black Sea of grain from both countries and fertilizer from Russia, to ease shortages in developing countries.


The next day, Russia fired missiles at the port city of Odesa, through which Ukrainian grain flows and formally declared Ukrainian ports unsafe.


As a result of the agreement, the first shipment of Ukraine grain to international destinations started on 1 August 2022.


Opinion polls ==
In the poll conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) between 13 and 18 May 2022, 82% of Ukrainians said they did not support any territorial concessions to Russia, even if that meant prolonging the war.


Another KIIS poll conducted in September 2022 found that 87% of Ukrainians opposed any territorial concessions to Russia.


A Gallup poll conducted in Ukraine in early September 2022 showed that 70% of Ukrainians want to continue the war with Russia until they achieve victory, while only 26% favor negotiations to end the war as soon as possible.


According to an opinion poll conducted in July 2022, 58% of Ukrainians said that Crimea must be returned to Ukraine.


According to a survey conducted by the Levada Center at the end of October 2022, 57% of Russian respondents favored the start of peace talks with Ukraine, and 36% preferred the continuation of hostilities.


A poll of Germans conducted by the Forsa and published in January 2023 found that over 80% believe it is more important to end the war through negotiations than for Ukraine to win, with only 18% disagreeing.


A YouGov poll showed that in February 2023, 63% of respondents in Sweden wanted to support Ukraine in a war with Russia until Russian troops leave all occupied territories, even if it means prolonging the war.


In Denmark, the corresponding figures were 56%; in Britain 53%, in the United States 46%, in Spain 44%;


Germany 40%, France 37% and Italy 29%.In fall 2023, US public support for arming Ukraine in its war against Russia significantly decreased.


Support for U.S. weapon shipments to Ukraine dropped from 46% to 41% compared to a poll taken in May 2023.


Both sides of the political spectrum saw a decline.


Since the counteroffensive started in June 2023, Ukrainian forces have only retaken a series of small villages and settlements and are only in control of a small percentage of the territories occupied by Russian forces.


On 5 October, the peace activist group Code Pink occupied the offices of US Senator Bernie Sanders demanding immediate peace negotiations rather than sending more weapons to the conflict zone.


Since the onset of the conflict, US Congress has sent weapons in the value of 26 billion USD to Ukraine.


See also ==
Black Sea Grain Initiative
Normandy Format
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant crisis
1918 Russia–Ukraine negotiations


References


