Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, China's position has been ambivalent.
On one hand, it has blamed enlargement of NATO, which Russia has stated as a reason for starting the war.
On the other hand, it has stressed respect for Ukraine's territorial integrity.
China has not condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine and has abstained during United Nations votes on the war in Ukraine.
Although the Government of China has objected to economic sanctions against Russia, its companies have largely complied with them.
Drones made by Chinese manufacturers are used by both sides in the conflict.
Some Chinese companies are under sanctions from the U.S. as sources of weaponry components and dual-use technology exported to Russia.
Chinese state media outlets and netizens have often taken pro-Russia stances and repeated Russian rhetoric, including disinformation.
In May 2022, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said that "China has chosen the policy of staying away.
At the moment, Ukraine is satisfied with this policy."
In August 2022, Zelenskyy stated that China has the economic leverage to pressure Putin to end the war.
China has attempted to mediate between Russia and Ukraine but has faced criticism of its proposals.
Chinese government ==
On 2 March 2022, The New York Times published an article citing a Western intelligence report which said that the Chinese government had asked the Russian government to delay the invasion until after the 2022 Winter Olympics.
The Chinese government denied the allegations, stating that the goal of "this kind of rhetoric is to divert attention and shift blame, which is utterly despicable."The Chinese government did not inform its citizens to take refuge until 25 February 2022, after the bombing started, and the Chinese embassy in Ukraine advised Chinese citizens to leave Ukraine immediately.
On 7 March 2022, the Chinese government stated that it had evacuated most Chinese citizens trapped on the battlefield.
The Chinese who fled Ukraine criticized the poor management.
On 15 March 2022, Chinese Ambassador to the United States Qin Gang wrote an op-ed in The Washington Post stating that "conflict between Russia and Ukraine does no good for China," that "the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries, including Ukraine, must be respected; the legitimate security concerns of all countries must be taken seriously," and that "threats against Chinese entities and businesses, as uttered by some U.S. officials, are unacceptable."On 29 April 2022, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian called China–Russia relations a "new model of international relations" that involved "not causing confrontations or targeting other nations", rising above "the model of military and political alliance in the Cold War era."Quoting the Russian parliament, The New York Times reported that in September 2022 Li Zhanshu, the third highest-ranking Politburo Standing Committee member of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and a top advisor to CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping, blamed NATO for expanding next to Russia and told a group of Russian legislators that "we fully understand the necessity of all the measures taken by Russia" and that it was placed in an "impossible situation" on the Ukrainian issue.
The Wall Street Journal reported that to advance its own interests, Russia has repeatedly leaked information without Chinese knowledge or ahead of China's announcements and decisions.
According to people close to China's top decision-makers, had they known about Russia's intention to leak Li's comments, his "choice of words would have been more careful to prevent China from being seen as an accomplice to Russia".In November 2022, during the 2022 G20 Bali summit, China objected to calling the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine a "war".
In the same month, Russia's ambassador to Beijing announced that Xi Jinping would be visiting Moscow, reportedly before China was ready for an announcement.
The Wall Street Journal quoted people close to the Chinese leadership saying that the "Chinese side hadnot even made a decision yet".According to U.S. intercepts of Russian intelligence from the 2022–2023 Pentagon document leaks, Russia believed that China had approved sending "lethal aid" disguised as civilian items.
U.S. officials said that they have not yet seen evidence but have repeatedly warned China against doing so.
Meetings with foreign leaders ===
On 1 March 2022, the Ukrainian and Chinese foreign ministers, Dmytro Kuleba and Wang Yi, held their first phone call since the beginning of the invasion.
Chinese media reported that Wang told Kuleba that he was "extremely concerned" about the risk to civilians and that it was necessary to "ease the situation as much as possible to prevent the conflict from escalating."
Kuleba was reported to have said that Ukraine "looks forward to China playing a mediation role in achieving a ceasefire."On 9 March 2022, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping held a video meeting with French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Olaf Scholz in which he stated that China was "pained to see the flames of war reignited in Europe" and called for the three countries to promote peace negotiations between Russia and Ukraine.
Later that month, Xi Jinping and American President Joe Biden held a two-hour long meeting over video in which the conflict in Ukraine featured significantly.
The American White House told the press after the call that Biden had warned Xi of "consequences if China provides material support to Russia."
On 20–22 March 2023, Xi Jinping visited Russia and met with Vladimir Putin, both in an official and unofficial capacity.
On 26 April 2023, Xi Jinping made an hour-long call to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
Zelenskyy described the call as "long and meaningful" and stressed "a just and sustainable peace for Ukraine."
United Nations votes ===
On 25 February 2022, China abstained from a United Nations Security Council vote denouncing the invasion.
On 2 March 2022, China joined 35 countries in abstaining from a United Nations General Assembly resolution which condemned Russia's aggression and demanded Russia's “immediate, thorough, and unconditional” withdrawal of troops from Ukraine.
Peace proposal
On 24 February 2023, China issued a twelve-point peace plan outline, calling for a cease fire and peace talks.
The same day, Zelenskyy indicated he was willing to consider aspects of the proposal, while Russia's foreign ministry stated that it welcomed the Chinese proposal.
Zelenskyy stated that he planned to meet Xi Jinping because it would be useful to both countries and global security.
Vladimir Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said "we paid a lot of attention to our Chinese friends' plan", but new "territorial realities could not be ignored" as these realities became "an internal factor" (for Russia).
Peskov then rejected the Chinese peace proposal, saying that "for now, we donot see any of the conditions that are needed to bring this whole story towards peace."
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken questioned China's peace proposal, saying "the world should not be fooled by any tactical move by Russia, supported by China or any other country, to freeze the war on its own terms."During the 2023 Belarus-China summit, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko and Xi jointly stated "deep concern about the development of the armed conflict in the European region and extreme interest in the soonest possible establishment of peace in Ukraine[.]"In June 2023, China's envoy to Ukraine Li Hui urged all parties to respect territorial integrity, stop arming the battlefield, and ensure the safety of nuclear facilities.
Following the 2023 Shangri-La Dialogue, Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov said that the peace plans presented by other countries such as China were attempts to mediate on behalf of Russia and that Ukraine is willing to accept a mediator only if the Russians can be convinced to withdraw from all Ukrainian territories.
China's 12-point peace plan was presented during a 42-nation peace discussion on 5 August 2023 at Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and live feedback was received .
State media
The coverage of the Russian invasion of Ukraine by mainland Chinese media has raised some controversies.
The European External Action Service stated that "Chinese state-controlled media and official social media channels have amplified selected pro-Kremlin conspiracy narratives."
BBC and CNN believe that discussions of the topic in mainland China are led by Chinese state media outlets, including Global Times, China Central Television (CCTV), and People’s Daily.
The journalistic integrity of these outlets has been called into question.
As an example, it was suspected that two days before the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Horizon News, the international relations subsection of The Beijing News, accidentally released an internal notice publicly on its official Weibo account.
The internal notice included censorship guidelines that demanded the restriction of content that is “unfavourable to Russia” and “pro-West”.
On the same day, an article on the Global Times website referred to Donetsk and Luhansk as “two nations”.
The article was later retracted as mainland Chinese media began to collectively refer to the two areas as “regions”.
On the day Russia launched its military operation against Ukraine, the Communist Youth League of China posted a rendition of the Soviet patriotic song “Katyusha” in Mandarin on its official bilibili account.
Initium Media saw this action as an attempt to sensationalize the military conflict.
Several media outlets believe that Chinese media undertook selective reporting.
Deutsche Welle and CNN questioned the avoidance of words such as “invasion” and “attack”, and the bias towards information from Russian officials, as well as the promotion of anti-U.S. sentiments within China.
However, The Wall Street Journal believes that Chinese state-run media outlets were exercising restraint in their coverage of the conflict, an indication of the cautious stance taken by the Chinese government.
Radio France Internationale believes that while China has not condemned Russia's invasion, it does not encourage its citizens to support Ukrainians, and has not openly supported Russia.
On 4 March, China Central Television (CCTV) started the live broadcast of the opening ceremony of the 2022 Paralympic Winter Games, which was held in Beijing.
During the broadcast, the chairman of the International Paralympic Committee Andrew Parsons mentioned the conflict in a speech made in English, harshly condemning the invasion and calling for peace.
CCTV muted this segment of the speech, and did not release a complete translation.
A shot of 20 Ukrainian athletes applauding and calling for peace was also removed.
The International Paralympic Committee believed that censorship took place and demanded an explanation from CCTV.As of early March, journalist Lu Yuguang of state-run Phoenix Television was the only foreign correspondent to have been embedded with frontline Russian forces.
After the Bucha massacre, Chinese state media began to show favor for the Russian point of view.
On 5 April, CCTV-4 relayed the Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov’s claim that the Bucha massacre is fake news, spread by Ukraine and the West to slander Russia.
Chinese media selectively reported on Ukrainian president Vlodomir Zelensky’s survey of the scene of the massacre, but did not report on the horrific nature of the scene and the pleas from local residents.
Global Times claimed that the Bucha massacre was a publicity stunt, in which the U.S. was involved.
CCTV made a report in the news at noon on 5 April, in line with the Russian side's allegation that the massacre in Bucha was fake, entitled "Russian Foreign Minister: Uncovering the lies of the Bucha case".
As of 6 April, state-run Chinese media outlets such as Xinhua News Agency and People’s Daily had not reported on the Bucha massacre in detail.
Industry ==
In January 2023, Bloomberg News reported that the U.S. government confronted the Chinese about their state-owned enterprises providing non-lethal assistance to Russia.
The sources declined to discuss any evidence in detail except to say that the assistance stopped short of evading wholesale the sanctions "the US and its allies imposed" after Russia invaded Ukraine.
The White House said it was monitoring and reviewing the situation.
In February 2023, The Wall Street Journal reported that according to Russian customs data, Chinese companies have shipped dual-use items such as navigation equipment, jamming technology, and fighter jet parts to Russian state-owned companies.
The same month, Der Spiegel reported that Xi’an Bingo Intelligent Aviation Technology was in talks to sell "kamikaze drones" to Russia.
Chinese companies have called the reports inaccurate.
The New York Times subsequently reported that Poly Technologies sent sufficient quantities of gunpower to the Barnaul Cartridge Plant to make 80 million rounds of ammunition.
In March 2023, Politico reported that between June and December 2022, Chinese companies such as the state-owned Norinco shipped dual-use items, including assault rifles, drone parts, and body armor, to Russian companies, which have also been routing shipments via Middle Eastern countries that have relationships with both Russia and the West.
U.S. officials stated that according to intelligence gleaned from Russia, China was considering supplying the country with lethal aid.
Different American officials expressed varying degrees of confidence in this assessment.
The U.S. also said Chinese-made ammunition has been used in Ukraine, although it was unclear who supplied it.
Other officials said that they had not seen evidence that China actually supplied arms to Russia.
The U.S. statement came at the eve of China's unveiling of its peace plan to stop the war.
The Biden administration decided against declassifying any sensitive details of the intelligence report.
Civil society
Due to the rise of anti-U.S. sentiments in China in recent years, as well as the bilateral strategic partnership between China and Russia, mainstream public opinions among Chinese civil society support the actions and position taken by the Russian president Vladimir Putin.
While anti-war and pro-Ukraine voices exist, they are few in number and have been viciously attacked by the pro-Russian masses and often censored.
According to Voice of America, a large volume of controversial commentary surfaced on Chinese social media in the early stages of the military conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Coupled with the fact that online discussions are strictly monitored and censored by the state, many believe that Chinese public opinion on the matter is divided, with opposing factions.
On one hand, much commentary is in support of Russia, recognizing Russia's concern for national security, and attributing the deterioration of Russia-Ukraine relations to NATO and Western nations such as the U.S..
As a result, these commentators support the military invasion of Ukraine, and even praise the Russian president Vladimir Putin as a heroic figure that dares to challenge the West.
According to a survey published by the US-China Perception Monitor in April 2022, 75% of online Chinese respondents said they agreed or strongly agreed that supporting Russia in the conflict was in China's national interest.
On the other hand, anti-war figures also exist in mainland China, such as the public figures Jin Xing, Yuan Li, and Ke Lan.
Many professors and alumni of institutions, including Peking University and Tsinghua University, also publicly expressed anti-war statements, but these statements have been harshly criticized by netizens, and are censored or deleted on mainland Chinese social media platforms.
Chinese company NetEase has published a few videos critical of Russia from Chinese in Ukraine and Ukrainians in China.
Furthermore, misogynistic comments have also been made by Chinese netizens, with "taking in beautiful Ukrainian women" becoming a meme.
These comments have been collectively translated and circulated outside of Chinese social media platforms, inciting widespread anti-Chinese sentiments and threatening the safety of Chinese people living in Ukraine.
Such comments have also been found on social media in the Republic of China.
Some mainland netizens also promoted Chinese unification with Taiwan by force in their discussions of the Russian invasion.
In response, Chinese state-run media outlet The Paper urged the public to comment on the war rationally, and not to become "vulgar bystanders".On 26 February 2022, five Chinese historians signed an open letter opposing the invasion, stating that "great catastrophes in history often started with local conflicts."
However, the letter was removed from the Internet by Chinese censors after three hours.
On 5 March, Hu Wei, the vice-chairman of the Public Policy Research Center of the Counsellors' Office of the State Council, wrote an article arguing that "China needs to respond flexibly and make strategic choices that conform to its long-term interests" and that "China cannot be tied to Putin and needs to be cut off as soon as possible."In September 2023, a Chinese opera singer Wang Fang sparked a diplomatic row after singing the Soviet war song "Katyusha" inside the Donetsk Academic Regional Drama Theater in Mariupol where hundreds were killed in 2022.
Wang was part of a group of Chinese bloggers illegally visiting the Ukrainian city.
Oleg Nikolenko, spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, said that "the performance of the song “Katyusha” by Chinese ‘opera singer’ Wang Fan on the ruins of the Mariupol Drama Theater, where the Russian army killed more than 600 innocent people, is an example of complete moral degradation".
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine said it is initiating a ban on entry to Ukraine for all "touring" Chinese bloggers in response and expects the Chinese side to explain the purpose of the Chinese citizens' stay in Mariupol, as well as the way they entered the temporarily occupied Ukrainian city.
Opinion polling ===
According to a Genron NPO poll released in November 2022 on Chinese peoples' views of the Russian invasion, 39.5% of respondents said the Russian actions "are not wrong", 21.5% said "the Russian actions are a violation of the U.N. Charter and international laws, and should be opposed", and 29% said "the Russian actions are wrong, but the circumstances should be considered."
International reactions
European Union ===
In May 2023, European Union (EU) officials reportedly criticized China's peace plan as an attempt at "freezing" the conflict in place and splitting the West in pushing Ukraine cease-fire.
NATO ===
On 23 March 2022, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg accused China of providing political support to Russia, "including by spreading blatant lies and misinformation," and expressed concern that "China could provide material support for the Russian invasion."
United Kingdom ===
In July 2023, Britain's head of MI6, Richard Moore, stated that the Chinese government and Xi Jinping were "absolutely complicit" in the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
United States ===
On 9 July 2022, U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken dismissed China's claims to be neutral in the Russo-Ukrainian War and accused China of supporting Russia.
Ukraine ===
In a 2019 poll by the Pew Research Center, 57% of Ukrainians held a favourable view towards China while 14% held an unfavourable view.
Following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, however, public attitudes towards China shifted: an opinion poll conducted in February-March 2023 by the Razumkov Centre showed that 60% of Ukrainians surveyed had a negative view of China.
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy said that China has the economic leverage to pressure Putin to end the war, adding, "I’m sure that without the Chinese market for the Russian Federation, Russia would be feeling complete economic isolation.
That’s something that China can do – to limit the trade [with Russia] until the war is over."
In August 2022, Zelenskyy said that since the beginning of the war in Ukraine, Xi Jinping had refused all his requests for direct talks with him.
Sanctions against China
E.U. sanctions ===
In May 2023, the EU discussed placing sanctions on companies from China and five other countries for selling equipment that could be used in weapons by Russia.
The Chinese government made a commitment to put pressure on the China-based companies on the list, prompting the EU to temporarily remove five of the eight Chinese companies on the draft list.
U.S. sanctions
In April 2022, U.S. Secretary of Treasury Janet Yellen warned China that it could face consequences for not sanctioning Russia.
In June 2022, the United States Department of Commerce added 36 companies to the Entity List based in more than eight countries, including five from China, alleging that they supplied Russian and Iranian entities with items under US sanction for the war in Ukraine.
The U.S. Treasury Department separately sanctioned a Chinese and an Armenian vendor for maintaining trade relationship with a Russian arms procurement firm.
In March 2023, the Treasury Department sanctioned six Chinese entities for supplying components to the Iran Aircraft Manufacturing Industries Corporation, which manufactures HESA Shahed 136 drones used by Russia against Ukraine.
US and European officials said there was no evidence China itself was supplying weapons to Russia.
Chinese foreign minister Qin Gang denied supplying weapons to either side of the conflict.
In July 2023, the US Office of the Director of National Intelligence published a report stating that the Chinese government is assisting Russia to evade sanctions and providing it with dual-use technology.
In October 2023, the US Department of Commerce added 42 Chinese companies to the Entity List for supplying Russia with microelectronics for missile and drone guidance systems.
International commentary and analysis ==
The Economist has stated that China's professed neutrality is in reality a pro-Russian pseudo-neutrality.
Mark Leonard of the European Council on Foreign Relations has stated that "for China, the war in Ukraine simply isnot that important," adding that the war is seen "not as a cataclysmic war that’s reshaping the global order, but as a proxy conflict."Joseph Torigian of the American University described the Chinese government's position on the invasion as a "balancing act," stating that "the governments of both countries hold similarly negative views about America’s role in Europe and Asia" but that China would not be willing to put its financial interests at risk to support Russia, especially given that China was "trying to preserve its reputation as a responsible stakeholder."
Ryan Hass of the Brookings Institution has argued that "without Russia, the thinking goes, China would be alone to deal with a hostile west determined to obstruct China's rise," but that the two countries "do not have perfectly aligned interests.
China has a lot more to lose than Russia.
China sees itself as a country on the rise with momentum behind it.
Russia is essentially fighting the tides of decline."Several commentators have foreseen a potential role for China as a key mediator in the conflict.
Érick Duchesne of the Université Laval has argued that "strategic ambiguity on the part of China could have a beneficial effect and help untie the Gordian knot of the crisis" and that it would be a "a serious mistake" for NATO countries to oppose Chinese mediation.
Zeno Leoni of King's College London argued that "should China lead parties involved to a new peace, it would be a major diplomatic and public relations victory for Beijing," as the Chinese government "would be able to present itself as a responsible great power and to convince the west that in future they might have to rely on Beijing's global influence at a time when US influence is declining."
See also ==
United States and the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Foreign involvement in the Russian invasion of Ukraine
References
As part of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Russian state and state-controlled media have spread disinformation in an information war.
Russian propaganda and fake news stories have attacked Ukraine's right to exist and accused it of being a neo-Nazi state, committing genocide against Russian speakers, developing nuclear and biological weapons, and being influenced by Satanism.
Russian propaganda also accuses NATO of controlling Ukraine and building up military infrastructure in Ukraine to threaten Russia.
Some of this disinformation has been spread by Russian web brigades.
It has been widely rejected as untrue and crafted to justify the invasion and even to justify genocidal acts against Ukrainians.
The Russian state has denied carrying out war crimes in Ukraine, and Russian media has falsely blamed some of them on Ukrainian forces instead.
Some of the disinformation seeks to undermine international support for Ukraine and to provoke hostility against Ukrainian refugees.
Russian disinformation has been pervasive and successful in Russia itself, due to censorship of war news and state control of most media.
Because of the amount of disinformation, Russian media has been restricted and its reputation has been tarnished in many Western and developed countries.
However, the Russian state has had more success spreading its views in many developing countries.
In particular, Chinese state media has been largely sympathetic to the Russian side, and has repeatedly censored war news or reproduced Russian fake news and disinformation.
Ukrainian media and politicians have also been accused of using propaganda stories and deception as a part of the military campaign, although such efforts have been much more limited than Russia's disinformation campaign.
Russian themes
Disinformation (a lie or exaggeration meant to sway opinion) has been spread by the Russian state, state-controlled media, propagandists, and Russian web brigades as part of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Its purpose is to build support for Russia's invasion, and to weaken opposition to the invasion.
It also seeks to sow disunity among Western countries who support Ukraine; to counter NATO; and to cover up or create plausible deniability for Russian war crimes.
The following are common themes in Russian propaganda and disinformation, along with some of the common rebuttals.
Denying Ukrainian nationhood and statehood
Russian propaganda has targeted Ukrainian nationhood and national identity, portraying Ukrainians as "Little Russians" or "part of an all-Russian nation".
This has been a theme in Russian imperialist and nationalist rhetoric since the seventeenth century.
For years, Russian President Vladimir Putin has questioned the Ukrainian people's identity and the country's legitimacy and spread conspiratorial views of Ukrainian national identity as an "anti-Russian project" in his 2021 essay "On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians".
After the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution, Russian rhetoric portrayed Ukrainian governments as illegitimate, calling them the "Kyiv regime" or a "Nazi/fascist junta".
Putin said they were "led by a band of drug addicts and neo-Nazis", and claimed Ukraine is "under external control" by the West or the United States.
Such denial of nationhood is said to be part of a campaign of incitement to genocide by Russian state authorities.
Allegations of Nazism
Putin falsely claimed that the Ukrainian government were neo-Nazis and announced that one of his goals was the "de-Nazification of Ukraine".
Putin's claims were repeated by Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in a speech to the UN Human Rights Council; many diplomats walked out in protest.
These claims were repeated in Russian media to justify the war.
In April 2022, Russian state-owned news agency RIA Novosti published an article by Timofey Sergeytsev, "What Russia should do with Ukraine", where he argued that Ukraine and Ukrainian national identity must be wiped out, because he claimed most Ukrainians are at least "passive Nazis".
By May, references to de-Nazifying Ukraine in Russian media began to wane, reportedly because it had not gained traction with the Russian public.
These allegations of Nazism are widely rejected as untrue and part of a Russian disinformation campaign to justify the invasion, with many pointing out that Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy is Jewish and had relatives who were victims of the Holocaust.
Some of the world's leading historians of Nazism and the Holocaust put out a statement rejecting Putin's claims, which was signed by hundreds of other historians and scholars of the subject.
It says:"We strongly reject the Russian government's ... equation of the Ukrainian state with the Nazi regime to justify its unprovoked aggression.
This rhetoric is factually wrong, morally repugnant and deeply offensive to the memory of millions of victims of Nazism and those who courageously fought against it."
The authors say that Ukraine "has right-wing extremists and violent xenophobic groups" like any country, but "none of this justifies the Russian aggression and the gross mischaracterization of Ukraine".
The Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum denounced Putin's claims, saying "once again, innocent people are being killed purely because of insane pseudo-imperial megalomania".
The US Holocaust Memorial Museum and Yad Vashem condemned Putin's abuse of Holocaust history.
Ukrainian Jews likewise rejected claims of Ukraine being a neo-Nazi state.
Kremlin claims of Nazism against Ukraine are partly an attempt to drum-up support for the war among its citizens.
Russian propaganda has framed it as a continuation of the Soviet Union's "Great Patriotic War" against Nazi Germany even though Russia supports far-right groups across Europe.
In the words of Miriam Berger for The Washington Post, "the rhetoric of the 'fight against fascism' resonates deeply in Russia, which suffered huge losses in the fight against Nazi Germany".
As part of this propaganda drive was the use of Soviet imagery during the Russo-Ukrainian War, in which Ukrainian flags are replaced with Victory Banners in some Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine.
Experts on disinformation say that Russia's portrayal of Ukrainians as Nazis helps them justify Russian war crimes;
Russia's UN representative justified the Hroza missile attack in this way.
Historian Timothy Snyder said the Russian regime calls Ukrainians "Nazis" to justify the genocide of Ukrainians.
He said pro-war Russians use "Nazi" to mean "a Ukrainian who refuses to be Russian".
Russian neo-fascist Aleksandr Dugin proposed to simply "identify Ukrainian Nazism with Russophobia".
Dugin argued that Russia should be the only country allowed to define Ukrainian Nazism and Russophobia, in the same way that Jews have what he calls a "monopoly" on the definition of antisemitism.
Ukrainian officials respond that Russia's own actions in Ukraine are like those of Nazi Germany, and some commentators, including Snyder, have likened Putin's Russia to a fascist state (see Ruscism), despite Russian claims of anti-fascism.
Some Russian units who took part in the invasion are themselves linked to neo-Nazism, such as the Rusich Group and Wagner Group.
Russian far-right groups also played a major role among the Russian proxy forces in Donbas.
Like many countries, Ukraine has a far-right fringe, such as Right Sector and Svoboda.
Analysts generally agree that the Russian government greatly exaggerates far-right influence in Ukraine, as there is no widespread support for far-right ideology in the government, military, or electorate.
In the 2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election, a coalition of far-right parties including Right Sector received only 2% of votes and did not win any seats.
Ukraine's Azov Brigade, which had far-right origins and included neo-Nazis, was a focus of Kremlin propaganda.
By the time of the invasion, the brigade had been largely de-politicized.
According to a former fighter, the percentage of neo-Nazi members had already dropped in 2015, when they were about 10–20%, while Jews, Georgians, and Tatars also slowly joined the legion.
A 2022 Counter Extremism Project report concluded that the Azov Brigade can no longer be defined as neo-Nazi.
Allegations of "genocide" in Donbas
In his announcement of the invasion, Putin baselessly claimed that Ukraine was carrying out genocide in the mainly Russian-speaking Donbas region.
He said the purpose of Russia's "military operation" was to "protect the people" of the Russian-controlled breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Putin claimed they had been facing "genocide perpetrated by the Kyiv regime" for eight years.
There is no evidence for Putin's claims of genocide, and they have been widely rejected as an excuse to justify invasion.
The European Commission called the allegations "Russian disinformation".
Over 300 scholars on genocide issued a statement rejecting Russia's abuse of the term "genocide" to "justify its own violence".
Ukraine brought a case before the International Court of Justice (ICJ) to challenge Russia's claim.
The ICJ said it had not seen any evidence of genocide by Ukraine.
Altogether, about 14,300 people were killed in the Donbas War, both soldiers and civilians.
According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 6,500 were Russian proxy forces, 4,400 were Ukrainian forces, and 3,404 were civilians on both sides of the frontline.
The vast majority of civilian deaths were in the first year, and the death rate in the Donbas War was actually falling before the 2022 Russian invasion: in 2019 there were 27 conflict-related civilian deaths, in 2020 there were 26 deaths, and in 2021 there were 25 deaths, over half of them from mines and unexploded ordnance.
By comparison, after Russian full-scale invasion, 4,163 civilians were killed in March 2022,  meaning that more civilians died in that one month alone than in the entire 8-years of the War in Donbas.
Since the invasion, Russian state-controlled media and pro-Kremlin Telegram channels falsely accused Ukrainian troops of attacking civilian targets in Mariupol and bombing Ukrainian cities.
Allegations of NATO aggression
Russian propaganda often claims that NATO provoked the invasion and that Russia was forced to invade Ukraine to defend itself from NATO.
In his speech announcing the invasion, Putin falsely claimed that NATO military infrastructure was being built up inside Ukraine and was a threat to Russia.
Ukraine is not a NATO member, but Putin claimed that Ukraine is under NATO control.
After the invasion began, Russian state media falsely claimed that some military units fighting for Ukraine were under NATO command, and that thousands of NATO soldiers had been killed.
The Russian government has accused NATO of waging a "proxy war" against Russia, because its member states sent military aid to Ukraine after the invasion.NATO is a collective security alliance of 31 member states, similar to the CSTO that Russia is a member of.
Outside its member states, NATO only has a military presence in Kosovo and Iraq, at the request of their governments.
In 2002, Putin said Ukraine's relationship with NATO was not Russia's concern, and NATO and Russia had co-operated until Russia annexed Crimea.
NATO says it is not at war with Russia; its official policy is that it does not seek confrontation, but rather supports Ukraine in "its right to self-defense, as enshrined in the UN Charter".
Lawrence Freedman writes that calling Ukraine a NATO "proxy" wrongly implies that "Ukrainians are only fighting because NATO put them up to it, rather than because of the more obvious reason that they have been subjected to a vicious invasion".
He says that defeating Russia's invasion may prevent further Russian expansionism, which "is a bonus for NATO", but any weakening of Russia would be a result of "Moscow's folly ...not NATO's intent".
Geraint Hughes argues that accusing Ukraine of being NATO's "proxy" insults and belittles Ukrainians; it denies their autonomy and implies they do not really have the will to defend their country.
Putin claimed that NATO broke a promise not to let any Eastern European countries join.
This unwritten promise was allegedly made to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in 1990, but this was denied by both NATO and Gorbachev.
Between the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Russian invasion, 14 Eastern European countries willingly joined NATO, and the last time a country bordering Russia had joined NATO was in 2004.
Ukraine has sought NATO membership since Russia began its military intervention in 2014, and it applied to join NATO following the 2022 invasion.
According to Politico, members of the alliance have been wary of discussing Ukraine's potential membership due to "Putin's hyper-sensitivity" on the issue.
Russia's Security Council warned that Ukraine joining NATO would spark a Third World War.
Russia's invasion also prompted Finland to join NATO, doubling the length of Russia's border with NATO.
Unlike Ukraine, Putin said that Finland joining NATO was not a threat, "but the expansion of military infrastructure into this territory would certainly provoke our response".Shortly before his death in a plane crash, Russian oligarch Yevgeny Prigozhin accused the Russian military leadership of lying about NATO aggression to justify the invasion.
Prigozhin was a close ally of Putin and his Wagner Group played an important role in the Russian invasion.
Peter Dickinson of the Atlantic Council suggested the real reason Putin opposes NATO is because it "prevents him from bullying Russia's neighbors".
Alleged assassination and sabotage attempts ===
On 18 February 2022, the Luhansk People's Republic showed a video appearing to show the removal of a car full of explosives that had been prepared for blowing up a train full of women and children evacuating to Russia.
The video's metadata showed that it had been recorded on 12 June 2019.The breakaway Donetsk People's Republic also released a video on 18 February 2022 that claimed to show Poles trying to blow up a chlorine tank.
The video was distributed further by Russian media.
The video's metadata showed that it was created on 8 February 2022, and included a mix of different pieces of audio or video, including a 2010 YouTube video from a military firing range in Finland.
Ukrainian intelligence attributed responsibility for the video to the Russian intelligence service GRU.According to Bellingcat, a supposed bombing of a "separatist police chief" by a "Ukrainian spy", broadcast on Russian state television, showed visual evidence of the bombing of an old "green army vehicle".
The old car's registration plate was that of the separatist police chief, but the same licence plate was also seen on a different, new SUV.On 22 February 2022, the Russian people's militias in Ukraine accused Ukraine of a "terrorist attack" which killed three civilians in a car on the Donetsk-Gorlovka highway.
France 24 described the incident as a false flag attempt with corpses likely coming from a morgue to set up the scene.
Russia's alleged attempt to end the Donbas War ===
On 7 September 2022, at the Eastern Economic Forum, Putin claimed that Russia did not "start" any military operations, but was only trying to end those that started in 2014, after a "coup d’état in Ukraine".Before Russia began its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the intensity of the hostilities in the Donbas had been steadily declining since the signing of the Minsk agreements in February 2015.
Ukrainian biological and radiological weapons
Biological weapons labs
In March 2022, Russia made unsubstantiated allegations that Ukraine was developing biological weapons in a network of labs linked to the US.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China and Chinese state media amplified Russian claims.
QAnon promoters were also echoing the disinformation.
BBC Reality Check found no evidence supporting the claims.
The United Nations also refuted the claim.
Russian biologists in and outside of Russia have debunked the claims, stating that the allegations are "transparently false".According to researcher Adam Rawnsley, the Kremlin has a history of discrediting ordinary biology labs in former Soviet republics, having previously spread conspiracy theories about Georgia and Kazakhstan similar to the accusations deployed against Ukraine.
Birds as bio-weapons ====
Prior to March 2022, the Russian Ministry of Defence had made unsubstantiated accusations that the United States was manufacturing bio-weapons in Ukraine.
In March, the Ministry followed up with another conspiracy theory, which claims that the U.S. is training birds in Ukraine to spread disease among Russian citizens, according to a statement given by Major General Igor Konashenkov, spokesman of the Ministry to Russian state-controlled media.
Specific details were given about diseases involved, including the name of a specific strain of flu with 50% mortality, as well as Newcastle disease.
Media reports included maps, documents, and photos of birds with American military insignia, and also claimed that live, infected birds had been captured in eastern Ukraine.
The claims were laughed off by U.S. State Department spokesman, who called them "outright lies", "total nonsense", "absurd", "laughable" and "propaganda".
Director of the CIA William Burns told the U.S. Senate that Russia was using such claims to prepare the terrain for a biological or chemical attack by Russian forces against Ukraine, which they would then blame on the United States and Ukraine.
Combat mosquitoes ====
On 28 October 2022, Vasily Nebenzya, the Permanent Representative of Russia to the United Nations, accused Ukraine of using drones with "combat mosquitoes" which spread "dangerous viruses".
Andrii Yermak, the Head of the Office of the President of Ukraine, laughed off these accusations.
Ukrainian plans to use a dirty bomb
In March 2022, Russian state-controlled news agencies claimed, without evidence, that Ukraine was developing a plutonium-based dirty bomb nuclear weapon at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant.
In a series of calls to foreign defence officials made in October 2022, Russian Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu similarly claimed that Ukraine was preparing a "provocation" involving the use of a dirty bomb.
The Institute for the Study of War suggested a desire to slow or suspend foreign aid to Ukraine as a possible motive for the allegations.
The foreign ministries of France, the United Kingdom and the United States rejected "Russia's transparently false allegations".
In a briefing, the Russian Ministry of Defence used photos of the Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station, the Novosibirsk Chemical Concentrates Plant, the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, and a photo from a 2010 presentation by the Slovenian Radioactive Waste Management Agency as "evidence" for its claims.
Denial of Russian war crimes
During the Russian invasion of Ukraine, numerous war crimes and crimes against humanity were recorded and extensively documented, including attacks on civilians and energy-related infrastructure, wilful killings, unlawful confinement, torture, rape, unlawful transfers and deportations of children, and others.
Despite this, Russian officials denied all of the war crimes perpetrated by the Russian forces.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov called the Bucha massacre a "fake attack" used against Russia, claiming it had been staged.
He said that Russian forces had left Bucha on 30 March while evidence of killings had emerged, according to him, four days later.
On 4 April, at the United Nations, the Russian representative Vasily Nebenzya said that the bodies in the videos were not there before the Russian forces withdrew from Bucha.
This was contradicted by satellite images which showed that the bodies were there as early as 19 March; the position of the corpses in the satellite images match the smartphone photos taken in early April.
The Russian Defence Ministry's Telegram channel reposted a report stating Russian forces had not targeted civilians during the battle.
According to the statement, a massacre could not have been covered up by the Russian military, and the mass grave in the city was filled with victims of Ukrainian airstrikes.
The Ministry said it had analyzed a video purporting to show the bodies of dead civilians in Bucha, and said the corpses filmed were moving.
This claim was investigated by the BBC's Moscow Department, which concluded there was no evidence the video had been staged.
During the Mariupol theatre airstrike, Russian officials blamed Ukrainian forces of bombing themselves, though independent sources confirmed that Russia was responsible.
In November 2022, Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov denied that the Russian military was attacking civilian infrastructure in Ukraine.
According to Peskov, the Russian army only attacks targets that are directly or indirectly connected to military potential.
In January 2023, the Russian Ministry of Defence confirmed their responsibility for the Dnipro residential building airstrike, which killed over 40 civilians.
However, Peskov stated that Russian forces never attack residential buildings and that the residential building had probably collapsed because of a Ukrainian air defence counterattack.
In December 2022, Russian opposition politician Ilya Yashin was sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison for his statements about the circumstances of the killings in Bucha on charges of "spreading false information" about the armed forces.
Yashin was tried over a YouTube video released in April 2022 in which he discussed the discovery of murdered Ukrainian civilians in the suburban town of Bucha, near Kyiv.
In February 2023, Russian journalistMaria Ponomarenko was sentenced to six years in prison for publishing information about the Mariupol theatre airstrike.
Other Russian claims
Ukrainian Satanism and black magic ====
In May 2022, as the invasion continued, Russian state media claimed that Ukraine was using black magic to fend off the Russian military.
RIA Novosti claimed that evidence of black magic had been found in an eastern Ukrainian village; according to their report, Ukrainian soldiers had allegedly consecrated their weapons "with blood magick" at a location with a "satanic seal".Dmitry Medvedev, deputy chairman of Russia's Security Council and former Russian president and prime minister, described the invasion as a sacred war against Satan.
Vladimir Solovyov, a presenter on state-owned channel Russia-1, has also called the invasion a "holy war" against "Satanists" and said Russia is up against fifty countries that are "united by Satanism".Assistant secretary of Russia's Security Council, Aleksey Pavlov, called for the "de-Satanisation" of Ukraine in October 2022, claiming that the country had turned into a "totalitarian hypersect".
In an article for the Russian state-owned Argumenty i Fakty newspaper, he identified the Chabad-Lubavitch Hasidic Jewish movement as one of the "hundreds of neo-pagan cults" operating in Ukraine.
Russia's chief rabbi, Berel Lazar, wrote a letter to Russian authorities, asking them to condemn Pavlov's comments, which he described as "a new variety of old blood libels".
About 70% of Ukrainians are religious, and half of those attend religious services.
False flag fakes ====
In March 2022, videos were discovered purporting to show Ukrainian-produced disinformation about missile strikes inside Ukraine which were then "debunked" as some other event outside Ukraine.
However, this may be the first case of a disinformation false-flag operation, as the original, supposedly "Ukraine-produced" disinformation was never disseminated by anyone, and was in fact preventive disinformation created specifically to be debunked and cause confusion and mitigate the impact on the Russian public of real footage of Russian strikes within Ukraine that may get past Russian-controlled media.
According to Patrick Warren, head of Clemson's Media Forensics Hub, "It's like Russians actually pretending to be Ukrainians spreading disinformation. ...
The reason that it's so effective is because you donot actually have to convince someone that it's true.
It's sufficient to make people uncertain as to what they should trust."The Olenivka prison massacre, described by most independent experts as a Russian-orchestrated sabotage, has been reported by Russian media as a missile attack by Ukraine.
While the exact cause of the incident has still not been conclusively confirmed, most experts conclude the Russian version highly improbable.
Flight and surrender of Ukrainian President ====
The Russian state media agency TASS claimed that Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy fled Kyiv following the invasion and also that he had surrendered.
Zelenskyy used social media to post statements, videos and photos to counter the Russian disinformation.
Russian state-owned television channel Russia-1 spread false claims that Zelenskyy fled Ukraine following the 10 October 2022 missile strikes.
Anti-refugee sentiments ====
Russian disinformation has also attempted to promote anti-refugee sentiments in Poland and other countries dealing with the influx of mostly Ukrainian refugees from the war.
Social media accounts identified as having ties to Russia have promoted stories including claims of refugees committing crimes or being unfairly privileged, or about locals discriminating against refugees (in particular, against black and non-Ukrainian refugees).
Such disinformation is intended to weaken international support for Ukraine.
News masquerading as Western coverage ====
During the crisis, a number of fabricated CNN headlines and stories went viral on social media.
Misinformation spread on social media included a faked image of CNN reporting that Steven Seagal had been seen alongside the Russian military, false tweets claiming that a CNN journalist had been killed in Ukraine, a CNN lower third that was digitally altered to include a claim that Putin had issued a statement warning India not to interfere in the conflict, and another that was altered to claim that Putin planned to delay the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine until "Biden delivers weapons to Ukraine for Russia to capture", as well as a fabricated CNN tweet supposedly reporting on a figure referred to as "the Kharkiv Kid finder" alongside an image that actually portrayed the YouTuber Vaush, who resides in the US and was not in Kharkiv at the time.
In addition to fake news with CNN logo, other Western stations have had similar fakes distributed, for example BBC or DW.
"Grandmother with red flag"
A video showing an elderly woman holding a Soviet flag to greet the Ukrainian military has been widely spread in Runet since March 2022.
The grandmother with a red flag was turned into an iconic image by Russian propaganda.
Allegedly, it represents the desire of "ordinary Ukrainians" to reunite with their "Russian brothers".Anna Ivanovna, the subject of the "grandmother with red flag" video, explained that she mistook the Ukrainian military for Russian invaders and she wanted to "placate" them with a red Bolshevik flag so they would not destroy the village.
She now regrets it and feels like a "traitor".
Her house near Kharkiv was destroyed by the Russian army, and she and her husband have been evacuated.
She cursed the Russian army which she deemed was responsible for shelling her house.
The Ukrainian military appealed to the public to not chastise Ivanovna, who was a victim herself.
Russian claims regarding civilians ====
"Russian soldiers will be welcomed as heroes by civilians for liberating them in Ukraine" Ukrainians confront Russian tanks with bare hands 
Ukrainians jubilant as Ukraine retakes Kherson 
"No strikes are being made on civilian infrastructure" - February 2022 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov  “Russian armed forces do not attack civilian objects on the territory of Ukraine” - June 2023 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov Russia’s full-scale aggression has caused $137.8 billion damage to Ukraine’s infrastructure in a year.
"Civilians are not being targeted" The United Nations estimated that as of July 24, the war has killed or injured more than 12,000 civilians 
Civilians are tortured and killed 
Civilians suffer wilful killings, attacks, unlawful confinement, torture, rape and sexual violence, as well as forcible transfer and deportation of children - Chair of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, to the General Assembly
9.083 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since the beginning of the full-scale Russian invasion - June 2023  Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
The Kremlin claimed "that they do not intend to impose anything by force."Civilians who refuse Russian passports denied medical facilities 
Civilians without passports threatened with deportation 
"Ukrainian citizens can decide on their future" - President Putin 12 June 2021
Claims of Wikipedia publishing false information
Amongst Russia's attempts to control the free press and present their own views are attacks on Wikipedia, which has been on a government registry of prohibited websites for over 10 years.
In May 2022, the Wikimedia Foundation was fined 5 million rubles for articles about the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Russia claimed to have uncovered 16.6 million messages spreading "fakes" about the invasion on platforms including Wikipedia.
The Wikimedia Foundation appealed the ruling in June, stating the "information at issue is fact-based and verified by volunteers who continuously edit and improve articles on the site; its removal would therefore constitute a violation of people's rights to free expression and access to knowledge."In November 2022, a Russian court fined the Wikimedia Foundation 2 million rubles for not deleting "false" information in seven articles about the "special military operation", including the Bucha massacre and the Mariupol theatre airstrike.
In February 2023, a Russian court imposed a fine of 2 million rubles on the Wikimedia Foundation for failing to remove "misinformation" about the Russian military.
In April 2023, another fine of 800,000 rubles was imposed on the Wikimedia Foundation for not removing materials about Russian rock band Psiheya, with another fine of 2 million rubles being imposed in relation to other articles such as the Russian language version of Russian occupation of Zaporizhzhia Oblast.
Support for Hamas
On October 8, a video supposedly of Hamas thanking Ukraine for supplying them was shared by an X account linked to the Wagner Group.
It was viewed over 300,000 times and shared by American far-right accounts.
The next day, former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev tweeted, "Well, Nato buddies, you've really got it, havenot you?
The weapons handed to the Nazi regime in Ukraine are now being actively used against Israel."
Ukrainian themes
The Ghost of Kyiv
On the second day of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, videos and picture went viral on social media, with claims that a Ukrainian pilot nicknamed the "Ghost of Kyiv" had shot down 6 Russian fighter jets in the first 30 hours of the war.
However, there have been no credible evidence that he existed.
A video of the alleged pilot was shared on Facebook and the official Twitter account of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence, was later found to be from the video game Digital Combat Simulator World.
An altered photo was also shared by the former president of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko.
On 30 April 2022, Ukrainian Air Force asked the "Ukrainian community not to neglect the basic rules of information hygiene" and to "check the sources of information, before spreading it", stating that the Ghost of Kyiv "embodies the collective spirit of the highly qualified pilots of the Tactical Aviation Brigade who are successfully defending Kyiv and the region".
Other disinformation
Turkish mercenaries ===
In October 2022, a video had been gaining traction on social media allegedly showing Turkish mercenaries going to fight for Russia in the Ukraine war.
The video was first published by a pro-Russian Telegram channel claiming that "Turkish legionnaires joined the Russian army and will take part in combat operations in Ukraine".
But it quickly gained traction when Nexta shared it with a similar claim.
However journalists from Euronews Turkish-language service confirmed that the men are speaking a dialect of Turkish but are not from Turkey.
The mix between this dialect and some Russian words signals that these men were most likely Meskhetian Turks (Ahiska Turks).
Euronews spoke to a representative of Ahiska Turks abroad who confirmed that the men in the video are speaking the Ahiska dialect.
He also told that he believes that these men living in Russia and therefore being mobilised for the war in Ukraine.
Adding that, since Ahiska Turks consider themselves Turkish, this is why the soldiers were seen with a Turkish flag in the video.
Russosphere ===
Russosphere is a French-language social network that promotes pro-Russian propaganda in Africa.
It was created in 2021, but fully launched in February 2022, prior to the invasion of Ukraine.
It amassed over 65,000 followers on social media platforms such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter, as well as Telegram and VK.
The network's posts typically accuse France of modern-day "colonialism", describe the Ukrainian Army as "Nazis" and "Satanists", and praise the Wagner Group, a Russian private military company.
In early 2023, the BBC and Logically reported that Russosphere was created by Luc Michel, a Belgian far-right activist.
Russian mobilisation ===
On 22 September 2022, the "conscript base" of the 2022 Russian mobilisation from the hacker group Anonymous began to spread in Ukrainian Telegram channels.
As it was claimed, the distributed file allegedly contained the passport data of more than 305 thousand Russians subject to mobilisation "first of all."
It was also noted that Anonymous hackers obtained the data by hacking the website of the Russian defence ministry, but the group itself didnot report this leak.
The ministry didnot comment on the alleged leak, but reposted "War on Fakes", a Telegram channel.
The report says that the published database "is compiled from several open databases and has nothing to do with the Ministry of Defense."
Ruslan Leviev, the founder of Conflict Intelligence Team, and Andrei Zakharov, a correspondent of the BBC News Russian, are of the opinion that the "conscript base" is a fake.
Fake RAND report ===
In September 2022, the Swedish far-right online newspaper Nya Dagbladet published a document it claimed was leaked from the RAND Corporation, a U.S.-based think tank.
The report, which was supposedly published that January, claimed the U.S. planned the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the subsequent energy crisis to weaken Germany and divide Europe.
Nya Dagbladet's article was shared by Russian state media outlet RT and the Russian Embassy in Sweden on Twitter.RAND denied publishing such a report, stating that it was a fake.
Lead Stories noted that the document's content resembled statements by members of the far-right QAnon conspiracy theory movement.
Logically noted that the report contained many issues indicating it was a fake, including multiple factual, spelling, grammatical and formatting errors, and several discrepancies with RAND's other published reports.
Release of unproven intelligence by the West ==
United States officials said they had intelligence suggesting that Russia might be preparing to use chemical weapons in Ukraine, a claim that US President Joe Biden later echoed publicly.
However, in April 2022, three U.S. officials told NBC News that there is no evidence of Russia bringing chemical weapons near to Ukraine, and that the intelligence was released to deter Russia from using chemical weapons.U.S. officials had said that Russia had turned to China for potential military assistance, a claim one European official and two U.S. officials told NBC lacked hard evidence.
U.S. officials said that the Biden administration made this allegation to discourage China from actually providing assistance to Russia.
Censorship
In Russia
On 4 March 2022, Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish "knowingly false information" about the Russian military and its operations, with the Russian government deciding what is the truth, leading to some media outlets in Russia to stop reporting on Ukraine or shutting their media outlet.
Although the 1993 Russian Constitution has an article expressly prohibiting censorship, the Russian censorship apparatus Roskomnadzor ordered the country's media to only use information from Russian state sources or face fines and blocks, and accused a number of independent media outlets of spreading "unreliable socially significant untrue information" about the shelling of Ukrainian cities by the Russian army and civilian deaths.
Roskomnadzor launched an investigation against the Novaya Gazeta, Echo of Moscow, inoSMI, MediaZona, New Times, TV Rain, and other independent Russian media outlets for publishing "inaccurate information about the shelling of Ukrainian cities and civilian casualties in Ukraine as a result of the actions of the Russian Army".
On 1 March 2022, the Russian government blocked access to TV Rain, as well as Echo of Moscow, in response to their coverage of the invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces.
The channel closed, with its general director announcing they would be "temporarily halting its operations", on 3 March 2022.As of December 2022, more than 4,000 people were prosecuted under "fake news" laws in connection with the war in Ukraine.
Hugh Williamson, Europe and Central Asia director at Human Rights Watch, said that "These new laws are part of Russia’s ruthless effort to suppress all dissent and make sure the [Russian] population does not have access to any information that contradicts the Kremlin’s narrative about the invasion of Ukraine."Due to Russian fake news laws, Russian authorities blocked Facebook and Twitter, while TikTok in Russia banned new uploads.
However a study by Tracking Exposed found out that TikTok had blocked all non-Russian content, but has continued to host old videos uploaded by Russia-based accounts and permitted Russian state media to continue posting, described as establishing a "splinternet" within a global social media platform.
TikTok's vague censorship has permitted pro-Kremlin news but blocked foreign accounts and critics of the war, as a result "Russians are left with a frozen TikTok, dominated by pro-war content".
In China
The BBC reported that coverage of the war was heavily censored on social media in China.
Many stories and accounts supporting one or the other side were removed.
A Taiwanese research group accused Chinese media of "regularly quoting disinformation and conspiracy theories from Russian sources".In March 2022, China Global Television Network (CGTN) paid for digital ads on Facebook targeting users with newscasts featuring pro-Kremlin talking points after Meta Platforms banned Russian state media advertisements.
The same month, CGTN repeated unsubstantiated Russian claims of biological weapons labs in Ukraine.
A leaked internal directive from The Beijing News ordered its employees not to publish news reports that were "negative about Russia".
An analysis found that nearly half of Weibo's social media posts used Russia sources which were pro-Putin or described Ukraine in negative terms, while another third of posts were anti-West and blamed NATO, while very few posts described the war in neutral terms.
Several history professors have penned an open letter that strongly opposed China's support for "Russia's war against Ukraine" but their post was quickly deleted by censors, while a celebrity who criticized Russia over the invasion had her account suspended.
Effects of Russian disinformation
Facebook uncovered a Russian campaign using fake accounts, and attempts to hack the accounts of high-profile Ukrainians.
There are reports of Russian government staff searching for "organic content" posted by genuine users in support of the Kremlin, while making sure that these do not run afoul of platform guidelines, then amplifying these posts.
Researchers have found that Russia's Internet Research Agency has operated numerous troll farms who spam critics of the Kremlin with pro-Putin and pro-war comments.
In February 2022, Eliot Higgins of Bellingcat judged that the quality of Russian misinformation videos had weakened, but remained especially effective for the older generation of Russians.
Some observers noted what they described as a "generational struggle" among Russians over perception of the war, with younger Russians often opposed to the war and older Russians more likely to accept the narrative presented by state-controlled mass media in Russia.
Kataryna Wolczuk, an associate fellow of Chatham House's Russia and Eurasia programme, said that "[Older] Russians are inclined to think in line with the official 'narrative' that Russia is defending Russian speakers in Ukraine, so it's about offering protection rather than aggression."
About two-thirds of Russians use television as their primary source of daily news.
According to the cyber threat intelligence company Miburo, about 85% of Russians get most of their news from Russian state-controlled media.
Many Ukrainians say that their relatives and friends in Russia trust what the state-controlled media tells them and refuse to believe that there is a war in Ukraine and that the Russian army is shelling Ukrainian cities.
Some Western commentators have claimed that the main reason many Russians have supported Putin and the "special military operation" in Ukraine has to do with the propaganda and disinformation.
At the end of March, a poll conducted in Russia by the Levada Center concluded the following: When asked why they think the military operation is taking place, respondents said it was to protect and defend civilians, ethnic Russians or Russian speakers in Ukraine (43%), to prevent an attack on Russia (25%), to get rid of nationalists and "denazify" Ukraine (21%), and to incorporate Ukraine and/or the Donbas region into Russia (3%)."In China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Africa, the Arab world, and Latin America, some social media users trended towards showing sympathy for Russian narratives.
A study performed by Airlangga University revealed that 71% of Indonesian netizens supported the invasion.
This support was due to affection for Putin's strongman leadership, as well as anti-US and anti-Western political alignments.
Additionally, many Indonesians supported Russia due to positive reports of Ramzan Kadyrov and claims of the Azov Regiment covering their bullets with lard to be used against Chechen troops in the invasion.
A series of four online polls by Alexei Navalny's Anti-Corruption Foundation found that between 25 February and 3 March, the share of respondents in Moscow who considered Russia an "aggressor" increased from 29% to 53%, while the share of those who considered Russia a "peacemaker" fell by half from 25% to 12%.
On 5 April 2022, Alexei Navalny said the "monstrosity of lies" in the Russian state media "is unimaginable.
And, unfortunately, so is its persuasiveness for those who have no access to alternative information."
He tweeted that "warmongers" among Russian state media personalities "should be treated as war criminals.
From the editors-in-chief to the talk show hosts to the news editors, [they] should be sanctioned now and tried someday."
Countering Russian disinformation ==
The United States Department of State and the European External Action Service of the European Union (EU) published guides aiming to respond to Russian disinformation.
Twitter paused all ad campaigns in Ukraine and Russia in an attempt to curb misinformation spread by ads.
European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen announced an EU-wide ban of Russian state-sponsored RT and Sputnik news channels on 27 February, after Poland and Estonia had done so days before.
Reddit, an American social news aggregation, content rating, and discussion website, quarantined subreddits r/Russia, the national subreddit of Russia, and r/GenZedong, a self-described "Dengist" subreddit in March 2022, after both the subreddits were spreading Russian disinformation.
In the case of r/Russia, the site's administrators removed one of the moderators, for spreading disinformation.
Sister sub of r/Russia, r/RussiaPolitics was also quarantined for similar reasons.
When the subreddits are quarantined, they donot show up in searches, recommendations and user feeds, and anyone who tries to access the quarantined subreddits would be shown a warning regarding the content, which they must acknowledge in order to access it.
In May 2022 a group calling themselves NAFO was created with the object of posting irreverent commentary about the war and memes promoting Ukraine or mocking the Russian war effort and strategy using a "cartoon dog" based on the Shiba Inu.
NAFO was seen by The Washington Post as having significant effects against Russian troll farms.
On 28 August 2022, the official Twitter account of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine tweeted its appreciation of NAFO, with an image of missiles being fired and a "Fella" dressed in a combat uniform, hands on face, in a posture of appreciation.
See also ==
Nuclear threats during the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Russian web brigades
Social media in the Russo-Ukrainian War, the avenue by which much disinformation has spread
Vulkan files leak
References
External links ==
Tracking Social Media Takedowns and Content Moderation During the 2022 Russian Invasion of Ukraine
There have been several rounds of peace talks to halt Russia's 2022 invasion in Ukraine and end the Russo-Ukrainian War in an armistice.
The first meeting was held four days after the start of the invasion, on 28 February 2022, in Belarus.
It concluded without result, with delegations from both sides returning to their capitals for consultations.
A second and third round of talks took place on 3 and 7 March 2022, on the Belarus–Ukraine border, in an undisclosed location in the Gomel region of Belarus.
A fourth and fifth round of talks were respectively held on 10 and 14 March in Antalya, Turkey.
Peace talks and the stability of international borders were further discussed in the Ukrainian parliament during the week of 9 May.
Following the 2022 Ukrainian eastern counteroffensive, Russia renewed calls for peace talks.
Ukrainian leaders refused to reopen dialogue, claiming that the Russian government was not truly committed to peace and was simply stalling for time while its forces regrouped.
Background ==
Russia was a signatory to the 1994 Budapest Memorandum political agreement, providing security assurances to Ukraine.
Russia reaffirmed this assurance in 2009.
After the Russian occupation of Crimea began in 2014, Putin claimed that the Revolution of Dignity had created a new political entity and any prior agreement with Ukraine was therefore void.
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has repeatedly engineered frozen conflicts to block the expansion of NATO or the European Union into the former Soviet sphere of influence.
Conflicts are deemed "frozen" when fighting has stopped but no political resolution has been achieved.
In 2014, Russia orchestrated separatist movements in Ukraine, and Russian proxy forces began the Donbas war.
After Ukraine recovered significant territory up to August 2014, Russia intervened with conventional forces, leading to negotiated ceasefires through the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015.
These ceasefires had potential to freeze the conflict, but sporadic offensives by Russia-backed separatists continued.
Although Russia was a party to the Minsk agreements, it later denied any obligations, claiming to have only been a mediator between Ukraine and separatist forces.
On 24 February 2022, Russia began the Russian invasion of Ukraine as an escalation of the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War.
Negotiations
Peace negotiations: First phase of invasion (24 February to 7 April 2022) ===
Deputy Kremlin Chief of Staff Dmitry Kozak said in 2022 that he had negotiated an agreement with Ukraine within a few days of the invasion.
This settlement would have ended hostilities in exchange for guarantees that Ukraine would not join NATO; however, Putin rejected it as his aims had shifted to annexation.
A Kremlin spokesman denied the story.
First round (28 February) ====
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko agreed on 27 February that a Ukrainian delegation would meet with Russian officials on the Belarusian border, near the Pripyat River, without preconditions.
It was reported that Lukashenko assured Zelenskyy that all planes, helicopters, and missiles on Belarusian territory would remain on the ground during the negotiations.
Talks began on 28 February, near the Belarusian border.
The Ukrainian president's office said that the main goals were to call for an immediate ceasefire, and for Russian troops to be withdrawn from Ukraine.
It concluded with no immediate agreements.
Second round (3 March) ====
On 3 March, the second round of peace talks began.
Both sides agreed to open humanitarian corridors for evacuating civilians.
Russia's demands were Ukraine's recognition of Russian-occupied Crimea, independence for separatist-controlled Luhansk and Donetsk, and "de-militarisation" and "de-Nazification".
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba stated that while his country was ready for talks to resume, Russia's demands had not changed.
On 5 March, Naftali Bennett flew to Moscow and held three hours of meetings with Putin, then flew to Germany and held meetings with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz.
Bennett spoke in advance with Zelenskyy, who had previously asked for his help mediating.
He also coordinated with the US, France and Germany.
According to Al Monitor, the meetings were instigated by Scholz who made a brief visit to Israel on 3 March and held a long one-on-one meeting with Bennett, which produced the mediation idea.
Bennett said in 2023 that both sides had wanted a ceasefire, the odds of the deal holding had been 50-50, and that the Western powers backing Ukraine had blocked the deal.
Later he expressed doubts regarding the desirability of such a deal.
On 6 March, Ukrainian official Denys Kireyev was found dead after being accused of committing ‘treason’ and working for Russia.
Barely a week after attending the first round of peace talks, images of Kireev’s corpse began circulating.
Third round (7 March) ====
A third round of negotiations began on 7 March, amidst ongoing fighting and bombing.
Dmitry Peskov restated Moscow's demands, that Ukraine should agree to change its constitution to enshrine neutrality, accept that the Crimea was Russian territory, and recognize Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states; he claimed that Russia was ready to halt military operations "in a moment" if Kyiv agreed to these conditions.
Although a deal had not been reached yet, Ukrainian negotiator and advisor to the president Mykhailo Podoliak tweeted that "there were some small positive shifts regarding logistics of humanitarian corridors."
However, the day before, a Ukrainian negotiator was shot amid claims of spying for Russia.
Antalya Diplomacy Forum (10 March) ====
On 10 March, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba met for talks in Antalya, Turkey with Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu as mediator, in the first high-level contact between the two sides since the beginning of the invasion.
Ukraine had attempted to negotiate a 24-hour ceasefire to provide aid and evacuation to civilians, especially in Mariupol.
After two hours of talks, no agreement was reached.
Airstrikes on the port city continued.
Fourth round (14–17 March) ====
The fourth round of negotiations began on 14 March via video conference.
The talks lasted a few hours and ended without a breakthrough.
The two sides resumed talks on 15 March, after which Volodymyr Zelenskyy described the talks as beginning to "sound more realistic".By 16 March, Mykhailo Podoliak was assigned as the chief negotiator for the Ukrainian peace delegation, who indicated that peace negotiations of a 15-point plan would involve the retraction of Russian forces from their advanced positions in Ukraine, along with international guarantees for military support and alliance in case of renewed Russian military action, in return for Ukraine not pursuing further affiliation with NATO.The two sides again resumed talks on 16 March.
Later that day, the Financial Times reported that a 15-point plan, first discussed on 14 March, negotiated with the Russians was being identified by Zelenskyy as more realistic for ending the war.
After the fourth day of talks on 17 March, Russia said an agreement has not been reached.
Following the talks, French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian warned that Russia was only "pretending to negotiate", in line with a strategy it has used elsewhere.
On 20 March, Turkey's Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, the mediator of the talks, described them as "making progress".
Referring to his role as "an honest mediator and facilitator", he gave little further detail.
Following his address to the Israeli parliament, Zelenskyy thanked Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett for his efforts in encouraging peace talks, and suggested that they might take place in Jerusalem.
Fifth round (21 March) ====
The fifth round of talks, on 21 March, failed to achieve a breakthrough.
Zelenskyy called for direct talks with Putin to end the war.
Sergey Lavrov said direct talks between the two presidents would only go ahead once both sides are closer to reaching a settlement.
Renewal of peace talks: 29–30 March ====
On 28 March, Zelenskyy confirmed that a renewal of peace talk negotiations with Russia would start in Istanbul on 29 March, with the intention of discussing Ukrainian neutrality, along with the repudiation of any claims for Ukrainian NATO membership in the future.
On 29 March, Estonian Prime Minister, Kaja Kallas, indicated in agreement with French minister Le Drian that any Russian offers of peaceful negotiation about Ukraine, or withdrawal from Kyiv, should be regarded with diplomatic skepticism, based on a history of Russian unreliability in similar peace negotiations with other countries.
Ahead of the  29 March meeting Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stated that Ukraine was ready to agree to 4 out of Russia’s 6 demands.
He claimed Ukraine was prepared to renounce NATO membership and to make Russian Ukraine's second official language.
According to Erdoğan Ukraine was not prepared to recognise the Russian occupation of Crimea or parts of Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts.
Ukraine proposed adopting a neutral status in exchange for security guarantees along the lines of NATO Article 5.
The proposals also included a 15-year consultation period on the status of Russian-annexed Crimea and return of all Russian forces to their pre-invasion positions.
Russia's Ministry of Defense announced "drastic reduction of military activity" on the Kyiv and Chernihiv fronts, which, Russian presidential aide Vladimir Medinsky clarified, was not tantamount to a ceasefire.
In a televised meeting with military bloggers on 13 June 2023 the Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that Russia and Ukraine had come on that day to "a good agreement on how to resolve the current situation by peaceful means" but then the Ukrainians "threw it away" after the withdrawal of Russian troops from Kyiv following the failed Russian 2022 offensive on Kyiv.
According to Putin, Ukraine had agreed to curb Neo-Nazism in Ukraine through the "introducing appropriate restrictions in the law in Ukraine", but this has failed to happen intentionally.
On 14 June 2023, President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko claimed, in an interview with Russia-1, that Ukrainian and Russian delegations also discussed the possibility of "some sort of a lease" of Crimea during the March 2022 negotiations.
Peace talks: Second phase of invasion (7 April to 5 September)
April 2022 ====
On 7 April, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that the peace deal Ukraine drafted and presented to the Russian government contained "unacceptable" elements.
Lavrov said that the proposal diverged from the terms negotiators had agreed on.
Mykhaylo Podolyak, a negotiator for Ukraine, said that the comments from Lavrov are a tactic to draw attention away from the war crime accusations against Russian forces.
Lastly, Lavrov stated, "Despite all the provocations, the Russian delegation will continue with the negotiation process, pressing for our own draft agreement that clearly and fully outlines our initial and key positions and requirements."According to a May report from Ukrainska Pravda, the Russian side was ready for a meeting between Zelenskyy and Putin, but it later came to a halt after the discovery of War crimes in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, in particular the Bucha massacre.
In a surprise visit to Ukraine on 9 April, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said "Putin is a war criminal, he should be pressured, not negotiated with," and that the collective West was not willing to make a deal with Putin.
Three days after Johnson left Kyiv, Putin stated publicly that talks with Ukraine "had turned into a dead end".
Roman Abramovich visited Kyiv in an attempt to resume negotiations.
Zelenskyy proposed negotiating two separate documents, one being a bilateral agreement between Ukraine and Russia, and the other involving Ukraine and the West.
On 11 April, the Chancellor of Austria, Karl Nehammer, visited and spoke with Putin in Moscow in 'very direct, open and hard' talks which were skeptical of the short-term peaceful resolution of the invasion.
By 26 April, the Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres visited Russia for the purpose of speaking with Putin and Lavrov in separate meetings, and after the meetings with them indicating skepticism as to any short term resolution of differences between Russia and Ukraine largely due to very different respective perspectives on the circumstances of the invasion presently being adopted by each of the two nations.
According to U.S. officials who spoke to Foreign Affairs, a provisional agreement was reached in April, whereby the Russian forces would withdraw to the pre-invasion line and Ukraine would commit not to seek to join NATO in exchange for security guarantees from a number of countries.
However, in a July interview with Russian state media, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov stated that this compromise was no longer an option, saying that even the Donbas was not enough and that the "geography had changed."
May 2022 ====
On 13 May, U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin initiated a telephone conversation with Russian Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu, the first call since 18 February, before the invasion.
The call lasted about an hour with Austin urging an immediate ceasefire.
On 15 May, Putin convened the Collective Security Treaty Organization, consisting of Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Tajikistan, and Belarus, to discuss issues of peace and border security related to Ukraine and NATO.President Zelenskyy denounced suggestions by former US diplomat Henry Kissinger that Ukraine should cede control of Crimea and Donbas to Russia in exchange for peace.
On 25 May, Zelenskyy said that Ukraine would not agree to peace until Russia agreed to return Crimea and the Donbas region to Ukraine.
Zelenskyy stressed that "Ukrainians are not ready to give away their land, to accept that these territories belong to Russia."
He emphasized that Ukrainians own the land of Ukraine.
As of September 2022, these peace negotiations have been frozen indefinitely.
Peace talks: Third phase of invasion (6 September to present)
September 2022 ====
In September, Reuters reported that Kremlin Chief of Staff Dmitry Kozak had an agreement with the Ukrainian side with Ukraine's declaration that it will not join NATO, which was presented as Russia's key concern.
The agreement was however blocked by Putin, who "expanded his objectives to include annexing swathes of Ukrainian territory".
In the same month, Ukraine rejected a peace plan proposed by Mexico.
On 21 September, Zelenskyy addressed the UN General Assembly with a pre-recorded video, laying out five "non-negotiable" conditions for a "peace formula", comprising "just punishment" of Russia for its crimes committed against Ukraine, protection of life by "all available means allowed by the UN charter", restoring security and territorial integrity, security guarantees from other countries, and determination for Ukraine to continue defending itself.
Speaking to Bild, Zelenskyy stated that he saw little chance of holding talks with Putin unless Russia withdrew its forces from Ukrainian territory.
Following Putin's announcement of Russia annexing four regions of Ukrainian territory it had seized during its invasion, Zelenskyy announced that Ukraine would not hold peace talks with Russia while Putin was president.
October 2022 ====
Following the October 2022 missile strikes on Ukraine, China and India, who had abstained from condemning Russia at the UN, expressed concern and called for de-escalation and dialogue.
Turkish President Erdogan expressed some hope for a diplomatic resolution, saying that Putin "is now more open to possible peace talks" and that Kyiv "was not rejecting such peace talks."
The Russian government announced it was ready for a renewed dialogue, and indeed had always been open to negotiating an end to hostilities.
The Ukrainian leadership responded that it did not believe Russia was truly committed to peace, and was simply hoping to stall for time while rebuilding its military capabilities for future offensives.
On 3 October 2022, Elon Musk floated a controversial proposal on Twitter, arguing that Ukraine should permanently cede Crimea to Russia, which would be assured of its water supply from Ukraine, and that Ukraine should drop its bid to join NATO.
The four-part proposal, posted as a Twitter poll, suggested new referendums under UN supervision on the annexation of Russian-occupied territories.
The proposal was welcomed by the Russian government and rebuked by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy as "pro-Russia".
November 2022 ====
In a video address from November 7, Ukrainian President Zelenskyy named conditions for negotiating with Russia: "One more time: restoration of territorial integrity, respect for the U.N. charter, compensation for all material losses caused by the war, punishment for every war criminal and guarantees that this does not happen again."U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Mark Milley urged Ukraine and Russia to find a "political solution", saying that the war in Ukraine is unwinnable by purely military means.
December 2022 ====
In a December 2022 interview with the Associated Press, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba called for a February 2023 peace summit at the UN mediated by secretary-general António Guterres.
He stated that Ukraine would only invite Russia if the country faced an international court for war crimes.
Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that any peace plan can only proceed from Ukraine's recognition of Russia's sovereignty over the regions it annexed from Ukraine in September 2022.On 28 December 2022, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov stated that peace talks with Ukraine would only resume if it recognized Russia's sovereignty over the annexed and partially occupied regions.
January 2023 ====
In January 2023, Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that "there is currently no prospect for diplomatic means of settling the situation around Ukraine."
March 2023 ====
On 14 March 2023, Peskov said "We have to achieve our goals.
Right now this is only possible by military means due to the current position of the Kyiv regime."
April 2023 ====
Andrii Sybiha, deputy head of Zelenskyy’s office, told the Financial Times: "If we will succeed in achieving our strategic goals on the battlefield and when we will be on the administrative border with Crimea, we are ready to open [a] diplomatic page to discuss this issue."In April 2023, Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva suggested that Ukraine should "give up Crimea" to end the war, saying Zelenskyy "can not want everything".
Lula condemned Russia's violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity and said Russia should withdraw from Ukrainian territory it has occupied since February 2022.
He said Brazil advocates a "negotiated political solution to the conflict" and expressed "concern" about the "global consequences" of the war "in terms of food and energy security, especially in the poorest regions of the planet."
Ukraine rejected his proposal to give up Crimea in exchange for peace.
Lula proposed the creation of a "peace club" from a group of developing countries, including Brazil and China, which would try to negotiate peace in Ukraine.
Lula’s foreign policy adviser Celso Amorim said that "[a]s long as there are no talks, the ideal peace for the Ukrainians and the Russians will not happen.
There must be concessions."
Lula declared after a state visit to China that "the United States needs to stop encouraging war and start talking about peace".
U.S. National Security Council spokesman John Kirby responded by accusing Lula of "parroting Russian and Chinese propaganda", describing his comments as "simply misguided" and "suggesting the United States and Europe are somehow not interested in peace, or that we share responsibility for the war".
On 6 April 2023, Oleksiy Danilov, Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine, said about a possible peace agreement between Russia and Ukraine, which would freeze the conflict and leave the annexed territories of Ukraine, including Crimea, in Russia's possession, that "If Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky proposes peace talks between Kyiv and Moscow, he will commit political suicide."On 7 April 2023, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that Russia rejects the "unipolar world order" led by the United States and wants any peace talks with Ukraine to focus on creating a "new world order."On 30 April, Pope Francis announced that the Vatican is taking part in a secret "peace mission" to try to end the war between Russia and Ukraine.
May 2023 ====
In May 2023, UN Secretary-General António Guterres said peace negotiations to end the Russo-Ukrainian War were "not possible at this moment", saying it was clear that Russia and Ukraine "are completely absorbed in this war" and "are convinced that they can win."
On 16 May, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that the leaders of African countries came up with a new initiative for peace in Ukraine.
On 22 May, Denmark foreign minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen said the country was willing to host a summit in July 2023 aimed at "finding peace between Ukraine and Russia" adding that "it is necessary to build interest and involvement from countries like India, Brazil and China."On 22 May, Brazilian President Lula da Silva said that the countries of the Global South, including Brazil, India, Indonesia and China "want peace", but both Putin and Zelenskyy "are convinced that they are going to win the war" and do not want to talk about peace, so the war could be very long.
June 2023 ====
On 3 June, Indonesia's defense minister Prabowo Subianto proposed a multi-point peace plan including a ceasefire and establishing a demilitarised zone observed and monitored by the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces.
He said that a UN referendum should be held "to ascertain objectively the wishes of the majority of the inhabitants of the various disputed areas".
Prabowo's proposal was criticised by EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell.
Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov said that the peace plans presented by China, Brazil and Indonesia are attempts at mediation on behalf of Russia, saying that "they all currently want to be mediators on Russia’s side.
That’s why this sort of mediation currently doesnot fit for us at all because they arenot impartial."
Reznikov said that Ukraine is willing to accept China as a mediator for peace talks between Russia and Ukraine only if Beijing could convince Russia to withdraw from all the territories it has occupied in Ukraine.
In June, a delegation from Africa, including representatives from South Africa, Egypt, Senegal, Congo-Brazzaville, Comoros, Zambia, and Uganda, visited Ukraine and Russia to call for peace.
Both Russia and Ukraine welcomed the African leaders' mission, but Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba warned that "Any peace initiative should respect the territorial integrity of Ukraine, it should not imply, even in-between the lines, any cessation of Ukrainian territory to Russia.
Second, any peace plan should not lead to the freezing of the conflict."
After a meeting with African leaders in Kyiv, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that peace talks with Russia would be possible only after Moscow withdraws its forces from the entire occupied territory.
The African delegation was in Kyiv during a Russian missile strike on the city.
On 17 June, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa and other African leaders met Russian President Vladimir Putin in St. Petersburg.
Ramaphosa told Putin that the war must end, but Putin rejected the delegation's peace plan based on accepting Ukraine's internationally recognized borders.
July 2023 ====
On 29 July, during a meeting with African leaders at the 2023 Russia–Africa Summit in St. Petersburg, Russian President Vladimir Putin rejected a ceasefire and peace talks with Ukraine due to the ongoing Ukrainian counter-offensive against Russian forces in Russia-occupied southeastern Ukraine, saying "We cannot cease fire when we are under attack."
August 2023 ====
On 5 and 6 August 2023 Saudi Arabia hosted multinational peace talks attended by 40 countries (including China) in Jeddah focusing on Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's proposed peace plan.
Russia did not participate in the talks.
Prior  to the summit Andriy Yermak, Zelenskyy’s chief of staff, said there would be discussions on the Ukrainian Peace Formula, which "contains 10 fundamental points, the implementation of which will not only ensure peace for Ukraine, but also create mechanisms to counter future conflicts in the world".
After the summit no joint statement was issued.
The participants did agree to create working groups to develop details of key themes prominent in Zelenskyy's proposed peace plan (that calls for Russian troops to withdraw from all of Ukraine’s territory as part of a peace deal) while a parallel ambassadors group would continue technical work on the issues.
September 2023 ====
On 27 September 2023, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said in an interview with TASS that Russia was "ready to make agreements" on Ukraine if they would "take the situation on the ground" and Russian security interests into account.
According to Lavrov one of the Russian security interest was "the need to prevent the creation of a hostile Nazi regime near Russian borders."
Lavrov also said that Russia did not see "any serious proposals from the West" and he argued that they were promoting Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy ‘peace formula’ as "the sole basis for negotiations" and that there was "no point in discussing it as it is nothing but an ultimatum."
Lavrov also praised the June 2023 African, Arab League (although formally the Arab League never submitted its own peace proposal), Chinese, Brazilian and peace proposals "from other countries" since he claimed "All of them were guided by a sincere desire to facilitate an agreement, which would consider the root causes of the current situation and the need to eliminate them, and will also ensure equal security for all parties."
October 2023 ====
NBC News reported that officials at the 11 October 2023 Ukraine Defense Contact Group meeting began confidential and delicate talks with the Ukrainian officials about what the broad outlines of possible peace negotiations might entail, according to two U.S. participants.
Chinese peace proposal
In February 2023, during a speech at the 59th Munich Security Conference, Chinese foreign policy chief, CCP Politburo member Wang Yi said that CCP general secretary Xi Jinping would present a “peace proposal” to resolve what he described as the "conflict" between Moscow and Kyiv.
At the UN General Assembly marking the anniversary of the invasion, Chinese deputy UN Ambassador proposed China's plan including a ceasefire, dialogue, security guarantees for Russia, protection of civilians and the upholding of territorial integrity, while also insisting that the west was exacerbating the situation by sending weapons to Ukraine.
On Feb 24, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs published as a 12-point position paper on its website titled "China’s Position on the Political Settlement of the Ukraine Crisis", getting mixed responses from Western leaders.
President Zelenskyy stated "I plan to meet Xi Jinping and believe this will be beneficial for our countries and for security in the world", although a time and place for such meeting was not set.
Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova responded saying Russia appreciated Beijing's effort to resolve the conflict by peaceful means but that Russia was "open to achieving the goals of the special military operation by political and diplomatic means" and that it would entail recognising "new territorial realities" in Ukraine, referring to Russia's annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts.
Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that "for now, we donot see any of the conditions that are needed to bring this whole story towards peace."On 7 March 2023, China's Foreign Minister Qin Gang remarked, "the Ukraine crisis seems to be driven by an invisible hand pushing for the protraction and escalation of the conflict."
He insisted that sanctions and political pressure will not solve the problem.
Qin also said Beijing has not provided weapons to either side of the Ukraine conflict.
He added that "the process of peace talks should begin as soon as possible".
The PRC has called for peace negotiations since the conflict began to address the legitimate security concerns of all parties involved.
Prior to his visit to Russia on 20-22 March 2023, Xi Jinping said China's peace proposal to end the Russo-Ukrainian War reflected world opinion.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken questioned China's peace proposal, saying "the world should not be fooled by any tactical move by Russia, supported by China or any other country, to freeze the war on its own terms."On 26 April 2023, Chinese leader Xi Jinping called Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, over a month after Xi's summit with Russia's President Vladimir Putin.
According to Steve Tsang, director of the SOAS China Institute in London, "There is no indication that Xi is trying to get Putin or Russia to make concessions of any sort (and) the Chinese readout (of the call) does not include anything concrete that can start a peace process."In May 2023, European officials reportedly criticized China's peace plan as an attempt at "freezing" the conflict in place and splitting the West in pushing Ukraine cease-fire.
Agreements regarding grain exports
Russia and Ukraine signed agreements with Turkey and the United Nations on 22 July 2022, intended to secure exports via the Black Sea of grain from both countries and fertilizer from Russia, to ease shortages in developing countries.
The next day, Russia fired missiles at the port city of Odesa, through which Ukrainian grain flows and formally declared Ukrainian ports unsafe.
As a result of the agreement, the first shipment of Ukraine grain to international destinations started on 1 August 2022.
Opinion polls ==
In the poll conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) between 13 and 18 May 2022, 82% of Ukrainians said they did not support any territorial concessions to Russia, even if that meant prolonging the war.
Another KIIS poll conducted in September 2022 found that 87% of Ukrainians opposed any territorial concessions to Russia.
A Gallup poll conducted in Ukraine in early September 2022 showed that 70% of Ukrainians want to continue the war with Russia until they achieve victory, while only 26% favor negotiations to end the war as soon as possible.
According to an opinion poll conducted in July 2022, 58% of Ukrainians said that Crimea must be returned to Ukraine.
According to a survey conducted by the Levada Center at the end of October 2022, 57% of Russian respondents favored the start of peace talks with Ukraine, and 36% preferred the continuation of hostilities.
A poll of Germans conducted by the Forsa and published in January 2023 found that over 80% believe it is more important to end the war through negotiations than for Ukraine to win, with only 18% disagreeing.
A YouGov poll showed that in February 2023, 63% of respondents in Sweden wanted to support Ukraine in a war with Russia until Russian troops leave all occupied territories, even if it means prolonging the war.
In Denmark, the corresponding figures were 56%; in Britain 53%, in the United States 46%, in Spain 44%;
Germany 40%, France 37% and Italy 29%.In fall 2023, US public support for arming Ukraine in its war against Russia significantly decreased.
Support for U.S. weapon shipments to Ukraine dropped from 46% to 41% compared to a poll taken in May 2023.
Both sides of the political spectrum saw a decline.
Since the counteroffensive started in June 2023, Ukrainian forces have only retaken a series of small villages and settlements and are only in control of a small percentage of the territories occupied by Russian forces.
On 5 October, the peace activist group Code Pink occupied the offices of US Senator Bernie Sanders demanding immediate peace negotiations rather than sending more weapons to the conflict zone.
Since the onset of the conflict, US Congress has sent weapons in the value of 26 billion USD to Ukraine.
See also ==
Black Sea Grain Initiative
Normandy Format
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant crisis
1918 Russia–Ukraine negotiations
References
On 24 February 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine in an escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War that started in 2014.
The invasion was the biggest attack on a European country since World War II.
It is estimated to have caused tens of thousands of Ukrainian civilian casualties and hundreds of thousands of military casualties.
By June 2022, Russian troops occupied about 20% of Ukrainian territory.
About 8 million Ukrainians had been internally displaced and more than 8.2 million had fled the country by April 2023, creating Europe's largest refugee crisis since World War II. Extensive environmental damage caused by the war, widely described as an ecocide, contributed to food crises worldwide.
Before the invasion, Russian troops massed near Ukraine's borders as Russian officials denied any plans to attack.
Russian president Vladimir Putin announced a "special military operation" to support the Russian-backed breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk, whose paramilitary forces had been fighting Ukraine in the Donbas conflict since 2014.
Putin espoused irredentist views challenging Ukraine's right to exist, and falsely claimed that Ukraine was governed by neo-Nazis persecuting the Russian minority.
He said his goal was to "demilitarize" and "denazify" Ukraine.
Russian air strikes and a ground invasion launched at a northern front from Belarus towards Kyiv, a southern front from Crimea, and an eastern front from the Donbas and towards Kharkiv.
Ukraine enacted martial law and ordered a general mobilization.
Russian troops retreated from the northern front by April 2022 after encountering logistical challenges and stiff Ukrainian resistance.
On the southern and southeastern fronts, Russia captured Kherson in March and Mariupol in May after a destructive siege.
Russia launched a renewed offensive in the Donbas and continued to bomb military and civilian targets far from the front line, including the energy grid through the winter.
In late 2022, Ukraine launched successful counteroffensives in the south and east.
Soon after, Russia announced the illegal annexation of four partly-occupied regions.
In November, Ukraine retook parts of Kherson Oblast, including the city of Kherson itself.
In June 2023, Ukraine launched another counteroffensive in the southeast.
The invasion met international condemnation.
The United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the invasion and demanding a full Russian withdrawal in March 2022.
The International Court of Justice ordered Russia to suspend military operations and the Council of Europe expelled Russia.
Many countries imposed sanctions on Russia and its ally Belarus, and provided humanitarian and military aid to Ukraine.
Protests occurred around the world, along with mass arrests of anti-war protesters in Russia, which also enacted a law enabling greater media censorship.
Over 1,000 companies closed their operations in Russia and Belarus as a result of the invasion.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) opened investigations into possible crimes against humanity, war crimes, abduction of children, and genocide, issuing an arrest warrant for Putin in March 2023.
Background
International treaties ===
Ukraine signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1994, agreeing, in return for security guarantees, to dismantle the nuclear weapons the USSR had left in Ukraine when it collapsed.
Russia, the UK and the US agreed in the Budapest Memorandum to uphold Ukraine's territorial integrity.
In 1999, Russia signed the Charter for European Security, affirming the right of each state "to choose or change its security arrangements" and join alliances.
In 2002, Putin said that Ukraine's growing relations with NATO were no concern of Russia.
But when Ukraine and Georgia sought to join NATO in 2008, Putin warned that their membership would be a threat to Russia.
Some NATO members worried about antagonizing Russia.
At the 2008 Bucharest summit, NATO refused to offer Ukraine and Georgia membership, but Jaap de Hoop Scheffer also issued a statement that they would join one day.
Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov said Russia would do everything it could to prevent this.
Putin claimed that NATO members had promised in 1990 not to let Eastern European countries join.
That statement is disputed.
Ukrainian revolution, Russian intervention in Crimea and Donbas
Kremlin adviser Sergei Glazyev announced in September 2013 that if Ukraine signed an EU agreement as planned, Russia would be unable to guarantee Ukraine's independence.
In November, Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych cancelled the signing of an association agreement with the European Union (EU), choosing closer ties to the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union instead.
This coerced withdrawal triggered a wave of protests known as Euromaidan, culminating in the Revolution of Dignity in February 2014.
Pro-Russian unrest followed in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Russian soldiers with no insignia took strategic positions in the Ukrainian territory of Crimea, and seized the Crimean Parliament.
Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014, after a widely questioned referendum.
The war in Donbas began in April 2014 when armed Russian-backed separatists seized Ukrainian government buildings and proclaimed the independent Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic.
Russian troops were deeply involved in these conflicts.
The ceasefires of the Minsk agreements, signed in September 2014 and February 2015 in a bid to stop the fighting, repeatedly failed.
A dispute emerged over the role of Russia: Normandy Format members France, Germany, and Ukraine saw Minsk as an agreement between Russia and Ukraine, but Russia insisted Ukraine should negotiate directly with the two separatist republics.
The annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas sparked a wave of Russian nationalism and Russian fascism in Russia, with calls to annex more Ukrainian land for Novorossiya (New Russia).
Analyst Vladimir Socor called Putin's 2014 speech following the annexation a "manifesto of Greater-Russia Irredentism".
In July 2021, Putin published an essay titled "On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians", claiming that Russians and Ukrainians were "one people".
In the build-up to the invasion, Putin claimed that Ukraine was created by Russian Bolsheviks and "never had a tradition of genuine statehood."
American historian Timothy Snyder described Putin's ideas as imperialism.
British journalist Edward Lucas described it as historical revisionism.
Other observers found that the Russian leadership held a distorted view of modern Ukraine, as well as of its own history, and that these distortions have been cemented and propagated through the state.
Prelude
In March and April 2021, Russia built up its forces near the Russia–Ukraine border, and again in both Russia and Belarus between October 2021 and February 2022.
Members of the Russian government repeatedly denied having plans to invade or attack Ukraine.
The decision to invade Ukraine was reportedly made by Putin and a small group of war hawks or siloviki in Putin's inner circle, including national security adviser Nikolai Patrushev and defense minister Sergei Shoigu.
During the second build-up, Russia demanded that NATO end all activity in Eastern Europe and ban Ukraine or any former Soviet state from ever joining NATO.
Russia threatened an unspecified military response if NATO followed an "aggressive line."
These demands were widely seen as non-viable;
Eastern European states have willingly joined NATO for security reasons, and their governments sought protection from Russian irredentism.
A treaty to prevent Ukraine joining would go against NATO's "open door" policy, despite NATO's unenthusiastic response to Ukrainian requests to join.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg replied that "Russia has no say" on whether Ukraine joins, and that "Russia has no right to establish a sphere of influence to try to control their neighbors."
NATO's official policy is that it does not seek confrontation, and NATO and Russia had co-operated until Russia annexed Crimea.
NATO offered to improve communication with Russia to discuss missile placements and military exercises, as long as Russia withdrew troops from Ukraine's borders, but Russia did not do so.
French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Olaf Scholz both made efforts in February 2022 to prevent war.
Macron met Putin but failed to dissuade him from the invasion.
Scholz warned Putin of heavy sanctions would be imposed should he invade, and told Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to declare Ukraine a neutral state and renounce its aspirations to join NATO.
Zelenskyy replied that Putin could not be trusted to uphold such a settlement.
Putin's invasion announcement
On 21 February, Putin announced Russian diplomatic recognition of the Russian-controlled territories of Ukraine as independent states: the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic.
The following day, Russia announced that it was sending troops into these territories as "peacekeepers", and the Federation Council of Russia authorised the use of military force abroad.
Before 5 a.m. Kyiv time on February 24, Putin in another speech announced, a "special military operation", which "effectively declar[ed] war on Ukraine."
Putin said the operation was to "protect the people" of the Russian-controlled breakaway republics.
He falsely claimed that they had "been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kyiv regime."
Putin also falsely claimed that Ukrainian government officials were neo-Nazis under Western control, that Ukraine was developing nuclear weapons, and that NATO was building up military infrastructure in Ukraine to threaten Russia.
He said Russia sought the "demilitarisation and denazification" of Ukraine, and espoused views challenging Ukraine's right to exist.
Putin said he had no plans to occupy Ukraine and supported the right of the Ukrainian people to self-determination.
Russian missiles struck targets throughout Ukraine, and Russian troops invaded from the north, east, and south.
Reports of an alleged leak of Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) documents by US intelligence sources said that the FSB had not been aware of Putin's plan to invade Ukraine.
Timeline
The invasion, described as the biggest attack on a European country since the Second World War, began at dawn on 24 February.
Russia launched a simultaneous ground and air campaign, commencing air and missile strikes across Ukraine, with some rockets reaching as far west as Lviv.
It is Russia's largest combined arms operation since the Battle of Berlin in 1945.
Fighting began in Luhansk Oblast at 3:40 a.m. Kyiv time near Milove on the border with Russia.
The main infantry and tank attacks were launched in four spearheads, creating a northern front launched towards Kyiv from Belarus, a southern front from Crimea, a southeastern front from Russian-controlled Donbas, and an eastern front from Russia towards Kharkiv and Sumy.
Russian vehicles were subsequently marked with a white Z military symbol (a non-Cyrillic letter), believed to be a measure to prevent friendly fire.
Immediately after the invasion began, Zelenskyy declared martial law in Ukraine.
The same evening, he ordered a general mobilisation of all Ukrainian males between 18 and 60 years old, prohibiting them from leaving the country.
Wagner Group mercenaries and Kadyrovites contracted by the Kremlin reportedly made several attempts to assassinate Zelenskyy, including an operation involving several hundred mercenaries meant to infiltrate Kyiv with the aim of killing the Ukrainian president.
The Ukrainian government said anti-war officials within Russia's FSB shared the plans with them.
The Russian invasion was unexpectedly met by fierce Ukrainian resistance.
In Kyiv, Russia failed to take the city and was repulsed in the battles of Irpin, Hostomel, and Bucha.
The Russians tried to encircle the capital, but its defenders under Oleksandr Syrskyi held their ground, effectively using Western Javelin anti-tank missiles and Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to thin Russian supply lines and stall the offensive.
On the southern front, Russian forces had captured the regional capital of Kherson by 2 March.
A column of Russian tanks and armoured vehicles was ambushed on 9 March in Brovary and sustained heavy losses that forced them to retreat.
The Russian army adopted siege tactics on the western front around the key cities of Chernihiv, Sumy and Kharkiv, but failed to capture them due to stiff resistance and logistical setbacks.
In Mykolaiv Oblast, Russian forces advanced as far as Voznesensk, but were repelled and pushed back south of Mykolaiv.
On 25 March, the Russian Defence Ministry stated that the first stage of the "military operation" in Ukraine was "generally complete", that the Ukrainian military forces had suffered serious losses, and the Russian military would now concentrate on the "liberation of Donbas."
The "first stage" of the invasion was conducted on four fronts, including one towards western Kyiv from Belarus by the Russian Eastern Military District, comprising the 29th, 35th, and 36th Combined Arms Armies.
A second axis, deployed towards eastern Kyiv from Russia by the Central Military District (northeastern front), comprised the 41st Combined Arms Army and the 2nd Guards Combined Arms Army.
A third axis was deployed towards Kharkiv by the Western Military District (eastern front), with the 1st Guards Tank Army and 20th Combined Arms Army.
A fourth, southern front originating in occupied Crimea and Russia's Rostov oblast with an eastern axis towards Odesa and a western area of operations toward Mariupol was opened by the Southern Military District, including the 58th, 49th, and 8th Combined Arms Army, the latter also commanding the 1st and 2nd Army Corps of the Russian separatist forces in Donbas.
By 7 April, Russian troops deployed to the northern front by the Russian Eastern Military District pulled back from the Kyiv offensive, reportedly to resupply and redeploy to the Donbas region in an effort to reinforce the renewed invasion of southeastern Ukraine.
The northeastern front, including the Central Military District, was similarly withdrawn for resupply and redeployment to southeastern Ukraine.
On 26 April, delegates from the US and 40 allied nations met at Ramstein Air Base in Germany to discuss the formation of a coalition that would provide economic support in addition to military supplies and refitting to Ukraine.
Following Putin's Victory Day speech in early May, US Director of National Intelligence Avril Haines said no short term resolution to the invasion should be expected.
Ukraine's reliance on Western-supplied equipment constrained operational effectiveness, as supplying countries feared that Ukraine would use Western-made matériel to strike targets in Russia.
Military experts disagreed on the future of the conflict; some suggested that Ukraine should trade territory for peace, while others believed that Ukraine could maintain its resistance thanks to Russian losses.
By 30 May, disparities between Russian and Ukrainian artillery were apparent, with Ukrainian artillery being vastly outgunned, in terms of both range and number.
In response to US President Joe Biden's indication that enhanced artillery would be provided to Ukraine, Putin said that Russia would expand its invasion front to include new cities in Ukraine.
In apparent retribution, Putin ordered a missile strike against Kyiv on 6 June after not directly attacking the city for several weeks.
On 10 June 2022, deputy head of the SBU Vadym Skibitsky stated that during the Severodonetsk campaign, the frontlines were where the future of the invasion would be decided: "This is an artillery war now, and we are losing in terms of artillery.
Everything now depends on what [the west] gives us.
Ukraine has one artillery piece to 10 to 15 Russian artillery pieces.
Our western partners have given us about 10% of what they have."
On 29 June, Reuters reported that US Intelligence Director Avril Haines, in an update of past U.S. intelligence assessments on the Russian invasion, said that U.S. intelligence agencies agree that the invasion will continue "for an extended period of time ...
In short, the picture remains pretty grim and Russia's attitude toward the West is hardening."
On 5 July, BBC reported that extensive destruction by the Russian invasion would cause immense financial damage to Ukraine's reconstruction economy, with Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal telling nations at a reconstruction conference in Switzerland that Ukraine needs $750bn for a recovery plan and Russian oligarchs should contribute to the cost.
Initial invasion of Ukraine (24 February – 7 April)
The invasion began on 24 February, launched out of Belarus to target Kyiv, and from the northeast against the city of Kharkiv.
The southeastern front was conducted as two separate spearheads, from Crimea and the southeast against Luhansk and Donetsk.
Kyiv and northern front
Russian efforts to capture Kyiv included a probative spearhead on 24 February, from Belarus south along the west bank of the Dnipro River.
The apparent intent was to encircle the city from the west, supported by two separate axes of attack from Russia along the east bank of the Dnipro: the western at Chernihiv, and from the east at Sumy.
These were likely intended to encircle Kyiv from the north-east and east.
Russia tried to seize Kyiv quickly, with Spetsnaz infiltrating into the city supported by airborne operations and a rapid mechanised advance from the north, but failed.
The United States contacted Zelenskyy and offered to help him flee the country, lest the Russian Army attempt to kidnap or kill him on seizing Kyiv;
Zelenskyy responded that "The fight is here;
I need ammunition, not a ride."
The Washington Post, which described the quote as "one of the most-cited lines of the Russian invasion", was not entirely sure of the comment's accuracy.
Reporter Glenn Kessler said it came from "a single source, but on the surface it appears to be a good one."
Russian forces advancing on Kyiv from Belarus gained control of the ghost town of Chernobyl.
Russian Airborne Forces attempted to seize two key airfields near Kyiv, launching an airborne assault on Antonov Airport, and a similar landing at Vasylkiv, near Vasylkiv Air Base, on 26 February.
By early March, Russian advances along the west side of the Dnipro were limited by Ukrainian defences.
As of 5 March, a large Russian convoy, reportedly 64 kilometres (40 mi) long, had made little progress toward Kyiv.
The London-based think tank Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) assessed Russian advances from the north and east as "stalled."
Advances from Chernihiv largely halted as a siege began there.
Russian forces continued to advance on Kyiv from the northwest, capturing Bucha, Hostomel, and Vorzel by 5 March, though Irpin remained contested as of 9 March.
By 11 March, the lengthy convoy had largely dispersed and taken cover.
On 16 March, Ukrainian forces began a counter-offensive to repel Russian forces.
Unable to achieve a quick victory in Kyiv, Russian forces switched their strategy to indiscriminate bombing and siege warfare.
On 25 March, a Ukrainian counter-offensive retook several towns to the east and west of Kyiv, including Makariv.
Russian troops in the Bucha area retreated north at the end of March.
Ukrainian forces entered the city on 1 April.
Ukraine said it had recaptured the entire region around Kyiv, including Irpin, Bucha, and Hostomel, and uncovered evidence of war crimes in Bucha.
On 6 April, NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said that the Russian "retraction, resupply, and redeployment" of their troops from the Kyiv area should be interpreted as an expansion of Putin's plans for Ukraine, by redeploying and concentrating his forces on eastern Ukraine.
Kyiv was generally left free from attack apart from isolated missile strikes.
One did occur while UN Secretary-General António Guterres was visiting Kyiv on 28 April to discuss the survivors of the siege of Mariupol with Zelenskyy.
One person was killed and several were injured in the attack.
Northeastern front
Russian forces advanced into Chernihiv Oblast on 24 February and besieged its administrative capital.
The next day Russian forces attacked and captured Konotop.
A separate advance into Sumy Oblast the same day attacked the city of Sumy, just 35 kilometres (22 mi) from the Russo-Ukrainian border.
The advance bogged down in urban fighting, and Ukrainian forces successfully held the city, claiming more than 100 Russian armoured vehicles were destroyed and dozens of soldiers had been captured.
Russian forces also attacked Okhtyrka, deploying thermobaric weapons.
On 4 March, Frederick Kagan wrote that the Sumy axis was then "the most successful and dangerous Russian avenue of advance on Kyiv", and commented that the geography favoured mechanised advances as the terrain "is flat and sparsely populated, offering few good defensive positions."
Travelling along highways, Russian forces reached Brovary, an eastern suburb of Kyiv, on 4 March.
The Pentagon confirmed on 6 April that the Russian army had left Chernihiv Oblast, but Sumy Oblast remained contested.
On 7 April, the governor of Sumy Oblast said that Russian troops were gone, but had left behind rigged explosives and other hazards.
Southern front
On 24 February, Russian forces took control of the North Crimean Canal.
Troops used explosives to destroy the dam across the river, allowing Crimea to obtain water from the Dnieper, which had been cut off since 2014.
On 26 February, the siege of Mariupol began as the attack moved east linking to separatist-held Donbas.
En route, Russian forces entered Berdiansk and captured it.
On 1 March, Russian forces attacked Melitopol and nearby cities.
On 25 February, Russian units from the DPR were fighting near Pavlopil as they moved on Mariupol.
By evening, the Russian Navy began an amphibious assault on the coast of the Sea of Azov 70 kilometres (43 mi) west of Mariupol.
A US defence official said that Russian forces were deploying thousands of marines from this beachhead.
The Russian 22nd Army Corps approached the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant on 26 February and besieged Enerhodar.
A fire began, but the Ukrainian military said that essential equipment was undamaged.
A third Russian attack group from Crimea moved northwest and captured the bridge over the Dnieper.
On 2 March, Russian troops took Kherson; this was the first major city to fall to Russian forces.
Russian troops moved on Mykolaiv and attacked it two days later.
They were repelled by Ukrainian forces.
On 2 March, Ukrainian forces initiated a counter-offensive on Horlivka, controlled by the DPR.After renewed missile attacks on 14 March in Mariupol, the Ukrainian government said more than 2,500 had died.
By 18 March, Mariupol was completely encircled and fighting reached the city centre, hampering efforts to evacuate civilians.
On 20 March, an art school sheltering around 400 people, was destroyed by Russian bombs.
The Russians demanded surrender, and the Ukrainians refused.
On 27 March, Ukrainian deputy prime minister Olha Stefanishyna said that "(m)ore than 85 percent of the whole town is destroyed."Putin told Emmanuel Macron in a phone call on 29 March that the bombardment of Mariupol would only end when the Ukrainians surrendered.
On 1 April, Russian troops refused safe passage into Mariupol to 50 buses sent by the United Nations to evacuate civilians, as peace talks continued in Istanbul.
On 3 April, following the retreat of Russian forces from Kyiv, Russia expanded its attack on southern Ukraine further west, with bombardment and strikes against Odesa, Mykolaiv, and the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant.
Eastern front
In the east, Russian troops attempted to capture Kharkiv, less than 35 kilometres (22 mi) from the Russian border, and met strong Ukrainian resistance.
On 25 February, the Millerovo air base was attacked by Ukrainian military forces with OTR-21 Tochka missiles, which according to Ukrainian officials, destroyed several Russian Air Force planes and started a fire.
On 1 March, Denis Pushilin, head of the DPR, announced that DPR forces had almost completely surrounded the city of Volnovakha.
On 2 March, Russian forces were repelled from Sievierodonetsk during an attack against the city.
Izium was reportedly captured by Russian forces on 17 March, although fighting continued.
On 25 March, the Russian defence ministry said it would seek to occupy major cities in eastern Ukraine.
On 31 March, the Ukrainian military confirmed Izium was under Russian control, and PBS News reported renewed shelling and missile attacks in Kharkiv, as bad or worse than before, as peace talks with Russia were to resume in Istanbul.
Amid the heightened Russian shelling of Kharkiv on 31 March, Russia reported a helicopter strike against an oil supply depot approximately 35 kilometres (22 mi) north of the border in Belgorod, and accused Ukraine of the attack.
Ukraine denied responsibility.
By 7 April, the renewed massing of Russian invasion troops and tank divisions around the towns of Izium, Sloviansk, and Kramatorsk prompted Ukrainian government officials to advise the remaining residents near the eastern border of Ukraine to evacuate to western Ukraine within 2–3 days, given the absence of arms and munitions previously promised to Ukraine by then.
Southeastern front (8 April – 5 September)
By 17 April, Russian progress on the southeastern front appeared to be impeded by opposing Ukrainian forces in the large, heavily fortified Azovstal steel mill and surrounding area in Mariupol.
On 19 April, The New York Times confirmed that Russia had launched a renewed invasion front referred to as an "eastern assault" across a 480-kilometre (300 mi) front extending from Kharkiv to Donetsk and Luhansk, with simultaneous missile attacks again directed at Kyiv in the north and Lviv in western Ukraine.
As of 30 April, a NATO official described Russian advances as "uneven" and "minor."
An anonymous US Defence official called the Russian offensive "very tepid", "minimal at best", and "anaemic."
In June 2022 the chief spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Defence Igor Konashenkov revealed that Russian troops were divided between the Army Groups "Center" commanded by Colonel General Aleksander Lapin and "South" commanded by Army General Sergey Surovikin.
On 20 July, Lavrov announced that Russia would respond to the increased military aid being received by Ukraine from abroad as justifying the expansion of its special military operation to include objectives in both the Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions.
Russian Ground Forces started recruiting volunteer battalions from the regions in June 2022 to create a new 3rd Army Corps within the Western Military District, with a planned strength estimated at 15,500–60,000 personnel.
Its units were deployed to the front around the time of Ukraine's 9 September Kharkiv oblast counteroffensive, in time to join the Russian retreat, leaving behind tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and personnel carriers: the 3rd Army Corps "melted away" according to Forbes, having little or no impact on the battlefield along with other irregular forces.
Fall of Mariupol
On 13 April, Russian forces intensified their attack on the Azovstal Iron and Steel Works in Mariupol, and the remaining Ukrainian personnel defending it.
By 17 April, Russian forces had surrounded the factory.
Ukrainian prime minister Denys Shmyhal said that the Ukrainian soldiers had vowed to ignore the renewed ultimatum to surrender and to fight to the last soul.
On 20 April, Putin said that the siege of Mariupol could be considered tactically complete, since the 500 Ukrainian troops entrenched in bunkers within the Azovstal iron works and estimated 1,000 Ukrainian civilians were completely sealed off from any type of relief.
After consecutive meetings with Putin and Zelenskyy, UN Secretary-General Guterres on 28 April said he would attempt to organise an emergency evacuation of survivors from Azovstal in accordance with assurances he had received from Putin on his visit to the Kremlin.
On 30 April, Russian troops allowed civilians to leave under UN protection.
By 3 May, after allowing approximately 100 Ukrainian civilians to depart from the Azovstal steel factory, Russian troops renewed their bombardment of the steel factory.
On 6 May, The Daily Telegraph reported that Russia had used thermobaric bombs against the remaining Ukrainian soldiers, who had lost contact with the Kyiv government; in his last communications, Zelenskyy authorised the commander of the besieged steel factory to surrender as necessary under the pressure of increased Russian attacks.
On 7 May, the Associated Press reported that all civilians were evacuated from the Azovstal steel works at the end of the three-day ceasefire.
After the last civilians evacuated from the Azovstal bunkers, nearly two thousand Ukrainian soldiers remained barricaded there, 700 of them injured.
They were able to communicate a plea for a military corridor to evacuate, as they expected summary execution if they surrendered to Russian forces.
Reports of dissent within the Ukrainian troops at Azovstal were reported by Ukrainska Pravda on 8 May indicating that the commander of the Ukrainian Marines assigned to defend the Azovstal bunkers made an unauthorised acquisition of tanks, munitions, and personnel, broke out from the position there and fled.
The remaining soldiers spoke of a weakened defensive position in Azovstal as a result, which allowed progress to advancing Russian lines of attack.
Ilia Somolienko, deputy commander of the remaining Ukrainian troops barricaded at Azovstal, said: "We are basically here dead men.
Most of us know this and it's why we fight so fearlessly."On 16 May, the Ukrainian General staff announced that the Mariupol garrison had "fulfilled its combat mission" and that final evacuations from the Azovstal steel factory had begun.
The military said that 264 service members were evacuated to Olenivka under Russian control, while 53 of them who were "seriously injured" had been taken to a hospital in Novoazovsk also controlled by Russian forces.
Following the evacuation of Ukrainian personnel from Azovstal, Russian and DPR forces fully controlled all areas of Mariupol.
The end of the battle also brought an end to the Siege of Mariupol.
Russia press secretary Dmitry Peskov said Russian President Vladimir Putin had guaranteed that the fighters who surrendered would be treated "in accordance with international standards" while Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said in an address that "the work of bringing the boys home continues, and this work needs delicacy—and time."
Some prominent Russian lawmakers called on the government to deny prisoner exchanges for members of the Azov Regiment.
Fall of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk
A Russian missile attack on Kramatorsk railway station in the city of Kramatorsk took place on 8 April, reportedly killing at least 52 people and injuring as many as 87 to 300.
On 11 April, Zelenskyy said that Ukraine expected a major new Russian offensive in the east.
American officials said that Russia had withdrawn or been repulsed elsewhere in Ukraine, and therefore was preparing a retraction, resupply, and redeployment of infantry and tank divisions to the southeastern Ukraine front.
Military satellites photographed extensive Russian convoys of infantry and mechanised units deploying south from Kharkiv to Izium on 11 April, apparently part of the planned Russian redeployment of its northeastern troops to the southeastern front of the invasion.
On 18 April, with Mariupol almost entirely overtaken by Russian forces, the Ukrainian government announced that the second phase of the reinforced invasion of the Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv regions had intensified with expanded invasion forces occupying of the Donbas.
On 22 May, the BBC reported that after the fall of Mariupol, Russia had intensified offensives in Luhansk and Donetsk while concentrating missile attacks and intense artillery fire on Sievierodonetsk, the largest city under Ukrainian control in Luhansk province.
On 23 May, Russian forces were reported entering the city of Lyman, fully capturing the city by 26 May.
Ukrainian forces were reported leaving Sviatohirsk.
By 24 May, Russian forces captured the city of Svitlodarsk.
On 30 May, Reuters reported that Russian troops had breached the outskirts of Sievierodonetsk.
By 2 June, The Washington Post reported that Sievierodonetsk was on the brink of capitulation to Russian occupation with over 80 per cent of the city in the hands of Russian troops.
On 3 June, Ukrainian forces reportedly began a counter-attack in Sievierodonetsk.
By 4 June, Ukrainian government sources claimed 20% or more of the city had been recaptured.
On 12 June, it was reported that possibly as many as 800 Ukrainian civilians (as per Ukrainian estimates) and 300–400 soldiers (as per Russian sources) were besieged at the Azot chemical factory in Severodonetsk.
With the Ukrainian defences of Severodonetsk faltering, Russian invasion troops began intensifying their attack upon the neighbouring city of Lysychansk as their next target city in the invasion.
On 20 June it was reported that Russian troops continued to tighten their grip on Severodonetsk by capturing surrounding villages and hamlets surrounding the city, most recently the village of Metelkine.
On 24 June, CNN reported that, amid continuing scorched-earth tactics being applied by advancing Russian troops, Ukraine's armed forces were ordered to evacuate the Severodonetsk; several hundred civilians taking refuge in the Azot chemical plant were left behind in the withdrawal, with some comparing their plight to that of the civilians at the Azovstal steel works in Mariupol in May.
On 3 July, CBS announced that the Russian defense ministry claimed that the city of Lysychansk had been captured and occupied by Russian forces.
On 4 July, The Guardian reported that after the fall of the Luhansk oblast, that Russian invasion troops would continue their invasion into the adjacent Donetsk Oblast to attack the cities of Sloviansk and Bakhmut.
Kharkiv front
On 14 April, Ukrainian troops reportedly blew up a bridge between Kharkiv and Izium used by Russian forces to redeploy troops to Izium, impeding the Russian convoy.
On 5 May, David Axe writing for Forbes stated that the Ukrainian army had concentrated its 4th and 17th Tank Brigades and the 95th Air Assault Brigade around Izium for possible rearguard action against the deployed Russian troops in the area;
Axe added that the other major concentration of Ukraine's forces around Kharkiv included the 92nd and 93rd Mechanised Brigades which could similarly be deployed for rearguard action against Russian troops around Kharkiv or link up with Ukrainian troops contemporaneously being deployed around Izium.
On 13 May, BBC reported that Russian troops in Kharkiv were being retracted and redeployed to other fronts in Ukraine following the advances of Ukrainian troops into surrounding cities and Kharkiv itself, which included the destruction of strategic pontoon bridges built by Russian troops to cross over the Seversky Donets river and previously used for rapid tank deployment in the region.
Kherson-Mykolaiv front
Missile attacks and bombardment of the key cities of Mykolaiv and Odesa continued as the second phase of the invasion began.
On 22 April 2022, Russia's Brigadier General Rustam Minnekayev in a defence ministry meeting said that Russia planned to extend its Mykolaiv–Odesa front after the siege of Mariupol further west to include the breakaway region of Transnistria on the Ukrainian border with Moldova.
The Ministry of Defence of Ukraine called this plan imperialism and said that it contradicted previous Russian claims that it did not have territorial ambitions in Ukraine and also that the statement admitted that "the goal of the 'second phase' of the war is not victory over the mythical Nazis, but simply the occupation of eastern and southern Ukraine."
Georgi Gotev of EURACTIV noted on 22 April that Russian occupation from Odesa to Transnistria would transform Ukraine into a landlocked nation with no practical access to the Black Sea.
Russia resumed its missile strikes on Odesa on 24 April, destroying military facilities and causing two dozen civilian casualties.
Explosions destroyed two Russian broadcast towers in Transnistria on 27 April that had primarily rebroadcast Russian television programming, Ukrainian sources said.
Russiah missile attacks at the end of April destroyed runways in Odesa.
In the week of 10 May, Ukrainian troops began to dislodge Russian forces from Snake Island in the Black Sea approximately 200 kilometres (120 mi) from Odesa.
Russia said on 30 June 2022 that it had withdrawn its troops from the island, once their objectives had been completed.
On 23 July, CNBC reported a Russian missile strike on the Ukrainian port of Odesa, swiftly condemned by world leaders amid a recent U.N. and Turkish-brokered deal to secure a sea corridor for exports of grains and other foodstuffs.
On 31 July, CNN reported significantly intensified rocket attacks and bombing of Mykolaiv by Russians, which also killed Ukrainian grain tycoon Oleksiy Vadaturskyi.
Zaporizhzhia front
Russian forces continued to fire missiles and drop bombs on the key cities of Dnipro and Zaporizhzhia.
Russian missiles destroyed the Dnipro International Airport on 10 April 2022.
On 2 May the UN, reportedly with the cooperation of Russian troops, evacuated about 100 survivors from the siege of Mariupol to the village of Bezimenne near Donetsk, from whence they would move to Zaporizhzhia.
On 28 June, Reuters reported that a Russian missile attack on the city of Kremenchuk northwest of Zaporizhzhia detonated in a public mall and caused at least 18 deaths.
France's Emmanuel Macron called it a "war crime."Ukrainian nuclear agency Energoatom called the situation at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant "extremely tense", although it was still operated by its Ukrainian staff.
As many as 500 Russian soldiers controlled the plant;
Kyiv's nuclear agency said they were shelling nearby areas and storing weapons and "missile systems" there.
Almost the entire country went on air raid alert.
"They already shell the other side of the river Dnipro and the territory of Nikopol," Energoatom president Pedro Kotin said.
Russia agreed on 19 August to allow IAEA inspectors access to the Zaporizhzhia plant after a phone call from Macron to Putin.
As of July 2023, however, access to the plant remained limited and required extensive negotiation.
Russia reported that 12 attacks with explosions from 50 artillery shells had been recorded by 18 August at the plant and the company town of Enerhodar.
Tobias Ellwood, chair of the UK's Defence Select Committee, said on 19 August that any deliberate damage to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant that could cause radiation leaks would be a breach of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, under which an attack on a member state of NATO is an attack on them all.
US congressman Adam Kinzinger said the following day that any radiation leak would kill people in NATO countries, an automatic activation of Article 5.Shelling hit coal ash dumps at the neighbouring coal-fired power station on 23 August, and the ash was on fire on 25 August.
The 750kV transmission line to the Dniprovska substation, the only one of the four 750 kV transmission lines still undamaged and cut by military action, passes over the ash dumps.
At 12:12 p.m. on 25 August the line cut off due to the fire, disconnecting the plant and its two operating reactors from the national grid for the first time since its startup in 1985.
In response back-up generators and coolant pumps for reactor 5 started up, and reactor 6 reduced generation.
Incoming power was still available across the 330 kV line to the substation at the coal-fired station, so the diesel generators were not essential for cooling reactor cores and spent fuel pools.
The 750 kV line and reactor 6 resumed operation at 12:29 p.m., but the line was cut by fire again two hours later.
The line, but not the reactors, resumed operation again later that day.
On 26 August, one reactor restarted in the afternoon and another in the evening, resuming electricity supplies to the grid.
On 29 August 2022, an IAEA team led by Rafael Grossi went to the plant to investigate .
Lydie Evrard and Massimo Aparo were also on the team.
No leaks had been reported at the plant before their arrival, but shelling had occurred days before.
Russian annexations and occupation losses (6 September – 11 November 2022)
On 6 September 2022, Ukrainian forces launched a surprise counteroffensive in the Kharkiv region, beginning near Balakliia, led by General Syrskyi.
An emboldened Kyiv launched a counteroffensive 12 September around Kharkiv successful enough to make Russia admit losing key positions and for The New York Times to say that it dented the image of a "Mighty Putin".
Kiev sought more arms from the West to sustain the counteroffensive.
On 21 September 2022, Vladimir Putin announced a partial mobilisation and minister of defence Sergei Shoigu said 300,000 reservists would be called.
He also said that his country would use "all means" to "defend itself."
Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskyy, said that the decision was predictable, and was an attempt to justify "Russia's failures."
British Foreign Office Minister Gillian Keegan called the situation an "escalation", while former Mongolian president Tsakhia Elbegdorj accused Russia of using Russian Mongols as "cannon fodder."
Russian annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts
In late September 2022, Russian-installed officials in Ukraine organised referendums on the annexation of the occupied territories of Ukraine.
These included the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic in Russian occupied Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine, as well as the Russian-appointed military administrations of Kherson Oblast and Zaporizhzhia Oblast.
Denounced by Ukraine's government and its allies as sham elections, the elections' official results showed overwhelming majorities in favor of annexation.
On 30 September 2022, Vladimir Putin announced the annexation of Ukraine's Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions in an address to both houses of the Russian parliament.
Ukraine, the United States, the European Union and the United Nations all denounced the annexation as illegal.
Zaporizhzhia front
An IAEA delegation visited the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant on 3 September, and on 6 September reported damage and security threats caused by external shelling and the presence of occupying troops in the plant.
On 11 September, at 3:14 a.m., the sixth and final reactor was disconnected from the grid, "completely stopping" the plant.
Energoatom said that preparations were "underway for its cooling and transfer to a cold state."In the early hours of 9 October 2022, Russian Armed Forces carried out an airstrike on a residential building in Zaporizhzhia, killing 13 civilians and injuring 89 others.
Kherson counteroffensive
On 29 August, Zelenskyy advisedly vowed the start of a full-scale counteroffensive in the southeast.
He first announced a counteroffensive to retake Russian-occupied territory in the south concentrating on the Kherson-Mykolaiv region, a claim that was corroborated by the Ukrainian parliament as well as Operational Command South.
On 4 September, Zelenskyy announced the liberation of two unnamed villages in Kherson Oblast and one in Donetsk Oblast.
Ukrainian authorities released a photo showing the raising of the Ukrainian flag in Vysokopillia by Ukrainian forces.
Ukrainian attacks also continued along the southern frontline, though reports about territorial changes were largely unverifiable.
On 12 September, Zelenskyy said that Ukrainian forces had retaken a total of 6,000 square kilometres (2,300 sq mi) from Russia, in both the south and the east.
The BBC stated that it could not verify these claims.
In October, Ukrainian forces pushed further south towards the city of Kherson, taking control of 1,170 square kilometres (450 sq mi) of territory, with fighting extending to Dudchany.
On 9 November, defence minister Shoigu ordered Russian forces to leave part of Kherson Oblast, including the city of Kherson, and move to the eastern bank of the Dnieper.
On 11 November, Ukrainian troops entered Kherson, as Russia completed its withdrawal.
This meant that Russian forces no longer had a foothold on the west (right) bank of the Dnieper.
Kharkiv counteroffensive
Ukrainian forces launched another surprise counteroffensive on 6 September in the Kharkiv region near Balakliia led by General Syrskyi.
By 7 September, Ukrainian forces had advanced some 20 kilometres (12 mi) into Russian occupied territory and claimed to have recaptured approximately 400 square kilometres (150 sq mi).
Russian commentators said this was likely due to the relocation of Russian forces to Kherson in response to the Ukrainian offensive there.
On 8 September, Ukrainian forces captured Balakliia and advanced to within 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) of Kupiansk.
Military analysts said Ukrainian forces appeared to be moving towards Kupiansk, a major railway hub, with the aim of cutting off the Russian forces at Izium from the north.
On 9 September, the Russian occupation administration of Kharkiv Oblast announced it would "evacuate" the civilian populations of Izium, Kupiansk and Velykyi Burluk.
The Institute for the Study of War (ISW) said it believed Kupiansk would likely fall in the next 72 hours, while Russian reserve units were sent to the area by both road and helicopter.
On the morning of 10 September, photos emerged claiming to depict Ukrainian troops raising the Ukrainian flag in the centre of Kupiansk, and the ISW said Ukrainian forces had captured approximately 2,500 square kilometres (970 sq mi) by effectively exploiting their breakthrough.
Later in the day, Reuters reported that Russian positions in northeast Ukraine had "collapsed" in the face of the Ukrainian assault, with Russian forces forced to withdraw from their base at Izium after being cut off by the capture of Kupiansk.
By 15 September, an assessment by UK's Ministry of Defence confirmed that Russia had either lost or withdrawn from almost all of their positions west of the Oskil river.
The retreating units had also abandoned various high-value military assets.
The offensive continued pushing east and by 2 October, Ukrainian Armed Forces had liberated another key city in the Second Battle of Lyman.
Winter stalemate, attrition campaign and military surge (12 November 2022 – 7 June 2023)
After the end of the twin Ukrainian counteroffensives, the fighting shifted to a semi-deadlock during the winter, with heavy casualties but reduced motion of the frontline.
Russia launched a self-proclaimed winter offensive in eastern Ukraine, but the campaign ended in "disappointment" for Moscow, with limited gains as the offensive stalled.
Analysts variously blamed the failure on Russia's lack of "trained men", and supply problems with artillery ammunition, among other problems.
Near the end of May, Mark Galeotti assessed that "after Russia's abortive and ill-conceived winter offensive, which squandered its opportunity to consolidate its forces, Ukraine is in a relatively strong position."On 7 February, The New York Times reported that Russians had newly mobilised nearly 200,000 soldiers to participate in the offensive in the Donbas, against Ukraine troops already wearied by previous fighting.
The Russian private military company Wagner Group took on greater prominence in the war, leading "grinding advances" in Bakhmut with tens of thousands of recruits from prison battalions taking part in "near suicidal" assaults on Ukrainian positions.
In late January 2023, fighting intensified in the southern Zaporizhzhia region, with both sides suffering heavy casualties.
In nearby southern parts of Donetsk Oblast, an intense, three-week Russian assault near the coal-mining town of Vuhledar was called the largest tank battle of the war to date, and ended in disaster for Russian forces, who lost "at least 130 tanks and armored personnel carriers" according to Ukrainian commanders.
The British Ministry of Defense stated that "a whole Russian brigade was effectively annihilated."
Battle of Bakhmut
Following defeat in Kherson and Kharkiv, Russian and Wagner forces have focused on taking the city of Bakhmut and breaking the half year long stalemate that has prevailed there since the start of the war.
Russian forces have sought to encircle the city, attacking from the north via Soledar.
After taking heavy casualties, Russian and Wagner forces took control of Soledar on 16 January 2023.
By early February 2023, Bakhmut was facing attacks from north, south and east, with the sole Ukrainian supply lines coming from Chasiv Yar to the west.
On 3 March 2023, Ukrainian soldiers destroyed two key bridges, creating the possibility for a controlled fighting withdrawal from eastern sectors of Bakhmut.
On 4 March, Bakhmut's deputy mayor told news services that there was street fighting in the city.
On 7 March, despite the city's near-encirclement, The New York Times reported that Ukrainian commanders were requesting permission from Kyiv to continue fighting against the Russians in Bakhmut.
On 26 March, Wagner Group forces claimed to have fully captured the tactically significant Azom factory in Bakhmut.
Appearing before the House Committee on Armed Services on 29 March, General Mark Milley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reported that, "for about the last 20, 21 days, the Russia have not made any progress whatsoever in and around Bakhmut."
Milley described the severe casualties being inflicted upon the Russian forces there as a "slaughter-fest."By the beginning of May, the ISW assessed that Ukraine controlled only 1.89 square kilometres of the city, less than five percent.
On 18 May 2023, The New York Times reported that Ukrainian forces had launched a local counteroffensive, taking back swathes of territory to the north and south of Bakhmut over the course of a few days.
2023 counteroffensives and summer campaign (8 June 2023 – present)
In June 2023, Ukrainian forces gradually launched a series of counteroffensives on multiple fronts, including Donetsk Oblast, Zaporizhzhia Oblast, and others.
On 8 June 2023, counteroffensive efforts focused near settlements such as Orikhiv, Tokmak, and Bakhmut.
However, counteroffensive operations have faced stiff resistance from Russia, and the American think tank Institute for the Study of War called the Russian defensive effort as having "an uncharacteristic degree of coherency."
By 12 June, Ukraine reported its fastest advance in seven months, claiming to have liberated several villages and advanced a total of 6.5 km.
Russian military bloggers also reported that Ukraine had taken Blahodatne, Makarivka and Neskuchne, and were continuing to push southward.
Ukraine continued to liberate settlements over the next few months, raising the Ukrainian flag over the significant settlement of Robotyne in late August.
On 24 June, the Wagner Group launched a brief rebellion against the Russian government, capturing several cities in western Russia largely unopposed before marching towards Moscow.
This came as the culmination of prolonged infighting and power struggles between Wagner and the Russian Ministry of Defense.
After about 24 hours, the Wagner Group backed down and agreed to a peace deal in which Wagner leader Yevgeny Prigozhin would go into exile in Belarus, and his forces would be free from prosecution.
On 27 June, the UK's Ministry of Defence reported that Ukraine were "highly likely" to have reclaimed territory in the eastern Donbas region occupied by Russia since 2014 among its advances.
Pro-Russian bloggers also reported that Ukrainian forces had made gains in the southern Kherson region, establishing a foothold on the left bank of the Dnipro river after crossing it.
In August, The Guardian reported that Ukraine had become the most mined country in the world, with Russia laying millions of mines attempting to thwart Ukraine's counteroffensive.
The vast minefields forced Ukraine to extensively de-mine areas to allow advances.
Ukrainian officials reported shortages of men and equipment as Ukrainian soldiers unearth five mines for every square metre in certain places.
Following Russia pulling out of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the conflict on the Black Sea escalated with Ukraine targeting Russian ships.
On 4 August, Ukrainian security service sources reported that the Russian landing ship Olenegorsky Gornyak had been hit and damaged by an unmanned naval drone.
Video footage released by Ukraine's security services appeared to show the drone striking the ship, with another video showing the ship seemingly listing to one side.
On 12 September, both Ukrainian and Russian sources reported that Russian naval targets in Sevastopol had been struck by unconfirmed weaponry, damaging two military vessels, one of them reportedly a submarine.
Ukraine also reported that several oil and gas drilling platforms on the Black Sea held by Russia since 2015 had been retaken.
In September 2023, Ukrainian intelligence estimated that Russia had deployed over 420,000 troops in Ukraine.
On 21 September, Russia began missile strikes across Ukraine, damaging the country's energy facilities.
On 22 September, the US announced it would send long-range ATACMS missiles to Ukraine, despite the reservations of some government officials.
The same day, the Ukrainian Main Directorate of Intelligence launched a missile strike on the Black Sea Fleet headquarters in Sevastopol, Crimea, killing several senior military officials.
In October 2023, it was reported that there was a growth of mutinies among Russian troops due to large amount of losses in Russian offensives around Avdiivka with a lack of artillery, food, water and poor command also being reported.
Battlespaces
Command
The supreme commanders-in-chief are the heads of state of the respective governments: President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine.
Putin has reportedly meddled in operational decisions, bypassing senior commanders and giving orders directly to brigade commanders.US general Mark Milley said that Ukraine's top military commander in the war, commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, General Valerii Zaluzhnyi, "has emerged as the military mind his country needed.
His leadership enabled the Ukrainian armed forces to adapt quickly with battlefield initiative against the Russians."
Russia began the invasion with no overall commander.
The commanders of the four military districts were each responsible for their own offensives.
After initial setbacks, the commander of the Russian Southern Military District, Aleksandr Dvornikov. was placed in overall command on 8 April 2022, while still responsible for his own campaign.
Russian forces benefited from the centralization of command under Dvornikov, but continued failures to meet expectations in Moscow led to multiple changes in overall command:
commander of the Eastern Military District Gennadii Zhidko (Eastern Military District, 26 May – 8 October 2022)
commander of the southern grouping of forces Sergei Surovikin  October 2022 – 11 January 2023)
commander-in-chief of the Russian Armed Forces Valerii Gerasimov (from 11 January 2023)Russia has suffered a remarkably large number of casualties in the ranks of its officers, including 12 generals.
Missile attacks and aerial warfare
Aerial warfare began the first day of the invasion. dozens of missile attacks were recorded across both eastern and western Ukraine, reaching as far west as Lviv.
By September, the Ukrainian air force had shot down about 55 Russian warplanes.
In mid-October, Russian forces launched missile strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure, intended to knock out energy facilities.
By late November, hundreds of civilians had been killed or wounded in the attacks, and rolling blackouts had left millions without power.
In December, drones launched from Ukraine allegedly carried out several attacks on Dyagilevo and Engels air bases in western Russia, killing 10 and heavily damaging two Tu-95 aircraft.
Crimea attacks
On 31 July 2022, Russian Navy Day commemorations were cancelled after a drone attack reportedly wounded several people at the Russian Black Sea Fleet headquarters in Sevastopol.
On 9 August 2022, large explosions were reported at Saky Air Base in western Crimea.
Satellite imagery showed at least eight aircraft damaged or destroyed.
Initial speculation attributed the explosions to long-range missiles, sabotage by special forces or an accident;
Ukrainian general Valerii Zaluzhnyi claimed responsibility on 7 September.
The base is near Novofedorivka, a destination popular with tourists.
Traffic backed up at the Crimean Bridge after the explosions with queues of civilians trying to leave the area.
A week later Russia blamed "sabotage" for explosions and a fire at an arms depot near Dzhankoi in northeastern Crimea that also damaged a railway line and power station.
Russian regional head Sergei Aksyonov said that 2,000 people were evacuated from the area.
On 18 August, explosions were reported at Belbek Air Base north of Sevastopol.
On the morning of 8 October 2022, the Kerch Bridge linking occupied Crimea to Russia, partially collapsed due to an explosion.
On 17 July 2023, there was another large explosion on the bridge.
Russian attacks against Ukrainian civilian infrastructure
Russia has carried out waves of strikes on Ukrainian electrical and water systems.
On 15 November 2022, Russia fired 85 missiles at the Ukrainian power grid, causing major power outages in Kyiv and neighboring regions.
On 31 December, Putin in his New Year address called the war against Ukraine a "sacred duty to our ancestors and descendants" as missiles and drones rained down on Kiev.
On 10 March 2023, The New York Times reported that Russia had used new hypersonic missiles in a massive missile attack on Ukraine.
Such missiles are more effective in evading conventional Ukrainian anti-missile defenses that had previously proved useful against Russia's conventional, non-hypersonic missile systems.
Naval blockade and engagements
Ukraine lies on the Black Sea, which has ocean access only through the Turkish-held Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits.
On 28 February, Turkey invoked the 1936 Montreux Convention and sealed off the straits to Russian warships that were not registered to Black Sea home bases and returning to their ports of origin.
It specifically denied passage through the Turkish Straits to four Russian naval vessels.
On 24 February, the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine announced that Russian Navy ships had begun an attack on Snake Island.
The guided missile cruiser Moskva and patrol boat Vasily Bykov bombarded the island with deck guns.
The Russian warship identified itself and instructed the Ukrainians on the island to surrender.
Their response was "Russian warship, go fuck yourself!"
After the bombardment, a detachment of Russian soldiers landed and took control of Snake Island.
Russia said on 26 February that US drones had supplied intelligence to the Ukrainian navy to help it target Russian warships in the Black Sea.
The US denied this.
By 3 March, Ukrainian forces in Mykolaiv scuttled the frigate Hetman Sahaidachny, the flagship of the Ukrainian navy, to prevent its capture by Russian forces.
On 14 March, the Russian source RT reported that the Russian Armed Forces had captured about a dozen Ukrainian ships in Berdiansk, including the Polnocny-class landing ship Yuri Olefirenko.
On 24 March, Ukrainian officials said that a Russian landing ship docked in Berdiansk – initially reported to be the Orsk and then its sister ship, the Saratov – was destroyed by a Ukrainian rocket attack.
In March 2022, the UN International Maritime Organization (IMO) sought to create a safe sea corridor for commercial vessels to leave Ukrainian ports.
On 27 March, Russia established a sea corridor 80 miles (130 km) long and 3 miles (4.8 km) wide through its Maritime Exclusion Zone, for the transit of merchant vessels from the edge of Ukrainian territorial waters south-east of Odesa.
Ukraine closed its ports at MARSEC level 3, with sea mines laid in port approaches, until the end to hostilities.
The Russian cruiser Moskva, the flagship of the Black Sea Fleet, was, according to Ukrainian sources and a US senior official, hit on 13 April by two Ukrainian Neptune anti-ship cruise missiles, setting the ship on fire.
The Russian Defence Ministry said the warship had suffered serious damage from a munition explosion caused in a fire, and that its entire crew had been evacuated.
Pentagon spokesman John Kirby reported on 14 April that satellite images showed that the Russian warship had suffered a sizeable explosion onboard but was heading to the east for expected repairs and refitting in Sevastopol.
Later on the same day, the Russian Ministry of Defence stated that the Moskva had sunk while under tow in rough weather.
On 15 April, Reuters reported that Russia launched an apparent retaliatory missile strike against the missile factory Luch Design Bureau in Kyiv where the Neptune missiles used in the Moskva attack were manufactured and designed.
On 5 May, a US official confirmed that the US gave "a range of intelligence" (including real-time battlefield targeting intelligence) to assist in the sinking of the Moskva.
In early May, Ukrainian forces launched counterattacks on Snake Island.
The Russian Ministry of Defense claimed to have repelled these counterattacks.
Ukraine released footage of a Russian Serna-class landing craft being destroyed in the Black Sea near Snake Island by a Ukrainian drone.
The same day, a pair of Ukrainian Su-27s conducted a high-speed, low level bombing run on Russian-occupied Snake Island; the attack was captured on film by a Baykar Bayraktar TB2 drone.
On 1 June, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov asserted that Ukraine's policy of mining its own harbours to impede Russia maritime aggression had contributed to the food export crisis, saying: "If Kyiv solves the problem of demining ports, the Russian Navy will ensure the unimpeded passage of ships with grain to the Mediterranean Sea."
On 30 June 2022, Russia announced that it had withdrawn its troops from the island in a "gesture of goodwill."
The withdrawal was later confirmed by Ukraine.
Nuclear threats
Four days into the invasion, President Putin placed Russia's nuclear forces on high alert, raising fears that Russia could use tactical nuclear weapons against Ukraine, or a wider escalation of the conflict could occur.
Putin alluded in April to the use of nuclear weapons, and Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said there was a "real" danger of a World War III.
On 14 April, CIA director William Burns said that "potential desperation" in the face of defeat could encourage President Putin to use tactical nuclear weapons.
In response to Russia's disregard of safety precautions during its occupation of the disabled former nuclear power plant at Chernobyl and its firing of missiles in the vicinity of the active Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant, Zelenskyy called on 26 April for an international discussion on Russia's use of nuclear resources, saying: "no one in the world can feel safe knowing how many nuclear facilities, nuclear weapons and related technologies the Russian state has ...
If Russia has forgotten what Chernobyl is, it means that global control over Russia's nuclear facilities, and nuclear technology is needed."
In August shelling around Zaporizhzhia power plant became a crisis, prompting an emergency inspection by the IAEA.
Ukraine described the crisis nuclear terrorism by Russia.
On 19 September Biden warned of a "consequential response from the U.S." Before the United Nations on 21 September he criticized Putin's nuclear sabre-rattling, calling Putin was "overt, reckless and irresponsible...
A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought."
In March 2023, Putin announced plans to install Russian tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus.
Ukrainian resistance
Ukrainian civilians resisted the Russian invasion by volunteering for territorial defence units, making Molotov cocktails, donating food, building barriers like Czech hedgehogs, and helping to transport refugees.
Responding to a call from Ukravtodor, Ukraine's transportation agency, civilians dismantled or altered road signs, constructed makeshift barriers, and blocked roadways.
Social media reports showed spontaneous street protests against Russian forces in occupied settlements, often evolving into verbal altercations and physical standoffs with Russian troops.
By the beginning of April, Ukrainian civilians began to organise as guerrillas, mostly in the wooded north and east of the country.
The Ukrainian military announced plans for a large-scale guerrilla campaign to complement its conventional defence.
People physically blocked Russian military vehicles, sometimes forcing them to retreat.
The Russian soldiers' response to unarmed civilian resistance varied from reluctance to engage the protesters, to firing into the air, to firing directly into crowds.
There have been mass detentions of Ukrainian protesters, and Ukrainian media has reported forced disappearances, mock executions, hostage-taking, extrajudicial killings, and sexual violence perpetrated by the Russian military.
To facilitate Ukrainian attacks, civilians reported Russian military positions via a Telegram chatbot and Diia, a Ukrainian government app previously used by citizens to upload official identity and medical documents.
In response, Russian forces began destroying mobile phone network equipment, searching door-to-door for smartphones and computers, and in at least one case killed a civilian who had pictures of Russian tanks.
As of 21 May 2022, Zelenskyy indicated that Ukraine had 700,000 service members on active duty fighting the Russian invasion.
Ukraine withdrew soldiers and military equipment back to Ukraine over the course of 2022 that had been deployed to United Nations peacekeeping missions like MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
International aspects
Reactions
The invasion received widespread international condemnation from governments and intergovernmental organisations.
On 2 March 2022 and on 23 February 2023, 141 member states of the UN General Assembly voted for a resolution saying that Russia should immediately withdraw.
Seven, including Russia, voted against the measure.
Political reactions to the invasion included new sanctions imposed on Russia, which triggered widespread economic effects on the Russian and world economies.
Over seventy sovereign states and the European Union delivered humanitarian aid to Ukraine, and nearly fifty countries plus the EU provided military aid.
Economic sanctions included a ban on Russian aircraft using EU airspace, a ban of certain Russian banks from the SWIFT international payments system, and a ban on certain Russian media outlets.
Reactions to the invasion have included public response, media responses, peace efforts, and the examination of the legal implications of the invasion.
The invasion received widespread international public condemnation.
Some countries, particularly in the Global South, saw public sympathy or outright support for Russia, due in part to distrust of US foreign policy.
Protests and demonstrations were held worldwide, including some in Russia and parts of Ukraine occupied by Russia.
Calls for a boycott of Russian goods spread on social media platforms, while hackers attacked Russian websites, particularly those operated by the Russian government.
Anti-Russian sentiment against Russians living abroad surged after the invasion.
In March 2022, Russian President Putin introduced prison sentences of up to 15 years for publishing "fake news" about Russian military operations, intended to suppress any criticism related to the war.
According to the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2023, 31 percent of the world's population live in countries that are leaning towards or supportive of Russia, 30.7 percent live in neutral countries, and 36.2 percent live in countries that are against Russia in some way.
By October 2022, three countries—Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia—had declared Russia a "terrorist state."
On 1 August, Iceland became the first European country to close its embassy in Russia as a result of the invasion of Ukraine.
The invasion prompted Ukraine, Finland and Sweden to officially apply for NATO membership.
Finland became a member of NATO in April 2023.
Foreign involvement
The Kiel Institute tracked $155.9 billion from 41 countries and European Union institutions in financial, humanitarian, and military aid to Ukraine from 24 January 2022 to 24 February 2023.
NATO is coordinating and helping member states to provide billions of dollars in military equipment and financial aid to Ukraine.
The United States has provided the most military assistance, having committed over $29.3 billion from 24 February 2022 to 3 February 2023.
Many NATO allies, including Germany, have reversed past policies against providing offensive military aid in order to support Ukraine.
The European Union, for the first time in its history, supplied lethal arms, and has provided €3.1 billion to Ukraine.
Bulgaria, a major manufacturer of Soviet-pattern weapons, has covertly supplied more than €2 billion worth of arms and ammunition to Ukraine, including a third of the ammunition needed by the Ukrainian military in the critical early phase of the invasion;
Bulgaria also provides fuel supplies and has, at times, covered 40% of the fuel needed by the Ukrainian armed forces.
Foreign involvement in the invasion has been worldwide and extensive, with support ranging from foreign military sales and aid, foreign military involvement, foreign sanctions and ramifications, and including foreign condemnation and protest.
The US adopted a policy of "no boots on the ground" in Ukraine.
Western and other countries imposed limited sanctions on Russia for recognising the separatist people's republics as independent nations.
When the attack began, many countries applied new sanctions intended to cripple the Russian economy.
The sanctions targeted individuals, banks, businesses, monetary exchanges, bank transfers, exports, and imports.
Belarus has allowed Russia to use its territory to stage part of the invasion, and to launch Russian missiles into Ukraine.
Politico reported in March 2023 that Chinese state-owned weapons manufacturer Norinco shipped assault rifles, drone parts, and body armor to Russia between June and December 2022, with some shipments via third countries including Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
According to the United States, Chinese ammunition has been used on battlefields in Ukraine.
In May 2023, the EU identified that Chinese and UAE firms were supplying weapon components to Russia.
In June 2023, US military intel suggested Iran was providing UAV production material to Russia.
On 21 September 2023, Poland said it would cease sending arms to Ukraine after a dispute between the two countries over grain.
International arrest warrants
The International Criminal Court (ICC) opened an investigation into possible crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes.
On 17 March 2023 the ICC issued a warrant for Putin's arrest, charging him with individual criminal responsibility in the abduction of children forcibly deported to Russia.
It was the first time that the ICC had issued an arrest warrant for the head of state of a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (the world's five principal nuclear powers).
Moscow has denied any involvement in war crimes, a response Vittorio Bufacchi of University College in Cork says "has bordered on the farcical," and its contention that the images coming out of Bucha were fabricated "a disingenuous response born by delusional hubris, post-truth on overdrive, (that) does not merit to be taken seriously."
Even the usually fractured United States Senate came together to call Putin a war criminal.
One of several efforts to document Russian war crimes concerns its repeated bombardment of markets and bread lines, destruction of basic infrastructure and attacks on exports and supply convoys, in a country where deliberate starvation of Ukrainians by Soviets the Holodomor still looms large in public memory.
Forcible deportation of populations, such as took place in Mariuopol, is another area of focus, since "(f)orced deportations and transfers are defined both as war crimes under the Fourth Geneva Convention and Protocol II and Article 8 of the Rome Statute—and as crimes against humanity—under Article 7 of the Rome Statute.
As both war crimes and crimes against humanity, they have several mechanisms for individual accountability, the International Criminal Court and also, at the individual state level, universal jurisdiction and Magnitsky sanctions legislation.
Casualties
Russian and Ukrainian sources have both been said to inflate the casualty numbers for opposing forces and downplay their own losses for the sake of morale.
Leaked US documents say that "under-reporting of casualties within the [Russian] system highlights the military's 'continuing reluctance' to convey bad news up the chain of command."
Russian news outlets have largely stopped reporting the Russian death toll.
Russia and Ukraine have each admitted suffering "significant" and "considerable" losses, respectively.
BBC News has reported that Ukrainian Russian casualty figures included the injured.
The numbers of civilian and military deaths have been as always impossible to determine precisely.
Agence France-Presse (AFP) reported that neither it nor independent conflict monitors were able to verify Russian and Ukrainian claims of enemy losses and suspected that they were inflated.
On 12 October 2022, the independent Russian media project iStories, citing sources close to the Kremlin, reported that more than 90,000 Russian soldiers had been killed, seriously wounded, or gone missing in Ukraine.
While combat deaths can be inferred from a variety of sources including satellite imagery of military action, civilian deaths can be more difficult.
On 16 June 2022, the Ukrainian Minister of Defence told CNN that he believed that tens of thousands of Ukrainians had died, adding that he hoped that the total death toll was below 100,000.
In the destroyed city of Mariupol alone, Ukrainian officials believe that at least 25,000 have been killed, and bodies were still being discovered in September 2022.
The mayor said over 10,000 and possibly as many as 20,000 civilians died in the siege of Mariupol and that Russian forces had brought mobile cremation equipment with them when they entered the city.
Researcher Dan Ciuriak from C.D. Howe Institute in August 2022 estimates the number of killed Mariupol civilians at 25,000, and an investigation by AP from the end of 2022 gives a number of up to 75,000 killed civilians in Mariupol area alone.
AFP says that "a key gap in casualty counts is the lack of information from Russian-occupied places like the port city of Mariupol, where tens of thousands of civilians are believed to have died".
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) reports similar issues and believed that the true civilian casualty numbers were significantly higher than it has been able to confirm.
Prisoners of war
Official and estimated numbers of prisoners of war (POW) have varied.
On 24 February Oksana Markarova, Ukraine's ambassador to the US, said that a platoon of 74th Guards from Kemerovo Oblast had surrendered, saying they were unaware that they had been brought to Ukraine and tasked with killing Ukrainians.
Russia claimed to have captured 572 Ukrainian soldiers by 2 March 2022, while Ukraine said it held 562 Russian soldiers as of 20 March.
It also released one soldier for five of its own and exchanged another nine for the detained mayor of Melitopol.
On 24 March 2022, 10 Russian and 10 Ukrainian soldiers, as well as 11 Russians and 19 Ukrainian civilian sailors, were exchanged.
On 1 April 86 Ukrainian servicemen were exchanged for an unknown number of Russian troops.
The Independent on 9 June 2022 cited an intelligence estimate of more than 5,600 Ukrainian soldiers captured, while the Russian servicemen held prisoner fell to 550 from 900 in April after several prisoner exchanges.
An 25 August 2022 report by the Humanitarian Research Lab of the Yale School of Public Health identified some 21 filtration camps or Ukrainian "civilians, POWs, and other personnel" in the vicinity of Donetsk oblast.
Imaging of one of these, Olenivka prison, found two sites with disturbed earth consistent with "potential graves."
Kaveh Khoshnood, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health, said: "Incommunicado detention of civilians is more than a violation of international humanitarian law—it represents a threat to the public health of those currently in the custody of Russia and its proxies."
Conditions described by freed prisoners include confinement include exposure, insufficient access to sanitation, food and water, cramped conditions, electrical shocks and physical assault.
In March 2023, UN human rights commissioner Volker Türk reported that more than 90% of the Ukrainian POWs interviewed by his office, which could only include those who were released from Russia, said in Russia "they were tortured or ill-treated, notably in penitentiary facilities, including through so-called – it is an awful phrase – 'welcoming beatings' on their arrival, as well as frequent acts of torture throughout detention."In April 2023, several videos started circulating on different websites purportedly showing Russian soldiers beheading Ukrainian soldiers.
Zelensky compared Russian soldiers to "beasts" after the footage was circulated.
Russian officials opened an investigation of the footage shortly thereafter.
Impacts
Humanitarian impact
The humanitarian impact of the invasion has been extensive and has included negative impacts on international food supplies and the 2022 food crises.
An estimated 6.6 million Ukrainians were internally displaced by August 2022, and about the same number were refugees in other countries.
The invasion has devastated the cultural heritage of Ukraine, with over 500 Ukrainian cultural heritage sites, including cultural centers, theatres, museums, and churches, affected by "Russian aggression."
Ukraine's Minister of Culture called it cultural genocide.
Deliberate destruction and looting of Ukrainian cultural heritage sites in this way is considered a war crime.
The Russian attacks on civilians, causing mass civilian casualties and displacement, have been characterized as genocide and democide.
On the 15th of September 2023, a U.N.-mandated investigative body presented their findings that Russian occupiers had tortured Ukrainians so brutally that some of their victims died, and forced families to listen as they raped women next door.
The commission has previously said that violations committed by Russian forces in Ukraine, including the use of torture, may constitute crimes against humanity.
Refugee crisis
The war caused the largest refugee and humanitarian crisis in Europe since the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s; the UN described it as the fastest growing such crisis since World War II.
As Russia built up military forces along the Ukrainian border, many neighbouring governments and aid organisations prepared for a mass displacement event in the weeks before the invasion.
In December 2021, the Ukrainian defence minister estimated that an invasion could force three to five million people to flee their homes.
In the first week of the invasion, the UN reported over a million refugees had fled Ukraine; this subsequently reached over eight million by 31 January 2023.
On 20 May, NPR reported that, following a significant influx of foreign military equipment into Ukraine, a significant number of refugees are seeking to return to regions of Ukraine which are relatively isolated from the invasion front in south-eastern Ukraine.
However, by 3 May, another 8 million people were displaced inside Ukraine.
Most refugees were women, children, elderly, or disabled.
Most male Ukrainian nationals aged 18 to 60 were denied exit from Ukraine as part of mandatory conscription, unless they were responsible for the financial support of three or more children, single fathers, or were the parent/guardian of children with disabilities.
Many Ukrainian men, including teenagers, opted to remain in Ukraine voluntarily to join the resistance.
According to the UN High Commission for Refugees as of 13 May 2022, there were 3,315,711 refugees in Poland, 901,696 in Romania, 594,664 in Hungary, 461,742 in Moldova, 415,402 in Slovakia, and 27,308 in Belarus, while Russia reported it had received over 800,104 refugees.
By 13 July 2022, over 390,000 Ukrainian refugees had arrived in the Czech Republic, where the average refugee was a woman accompanied by one child.
These refugees were twice as likely to have a college degree as the Czech population as a whole.
Turkey has been another significant destination, registering more than 58,000 Ukrainian refugees as of 22 March, and more than 58,000 as of 25 April.
The EU invoked the Temporary Protection Directive for the first time in its history, granting Ukrainian refugees the right to live and work in the EU for up to three years.
Britain has accepted 146,379 refugees, as well as extending the ability to remain in the UK for 3 years with broadly similar entitlements as the EU, three years residency and access to state welfare and services.
According to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Russia has engaged in "massive deportation" of over 1.3 million Ukrainian civilians, potentially constituting crimes against humanity.
The OSCE and Ukraine have accused Russia of forcibly moving civilians to filtration camps in Russian-held territory, and then into Russia.
Ukrainian sources have compared this policy to Soviet-era population transfers and Russian actions in the Chechen War of Independence.
For instance, as of 8 April, Russia claimed to have evacuated about 121,000 Mariupol residents to Russia.
Also, on 19 October, Russia announced the forced deportation of 60,000 civilians from areas around the line of contact in Kherson oblast.
RIA Novosti and Ukrainian officials said that thousands were dispatched to various centers in cities in Russia and Russian-occupied Ukraine, from which people were sent to economically depressed regions of Russia.
In April, Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council secretary Oleksiy Danilov said that Russia planned to build "concentration camps" for Ukrainians in western Siberia, and likely planned to force prisoners to build new cities in Siberia.
Long-term demographic effects ===
Both Russia and Ukraine faced the prospect of significant population decline even before the war, having among the lowest fertility rates worldwide and considerable emigration.
It is the first time that two countries with an average age above 40 have gone to war against each other.
Russia had a fighting-age (18- to 40-year-old) male population more than four times higher than Ukraine's and slightly higher birth rates, while the willingness to fight was more pronounced in Ukraine.
Several sources have pointed out that the war is considerably worsening Ukraine's demographic crisis, making significant shrinking very likely.
A July 2023 study by the Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies stated that "[r]egardless of how long the war lasts and whether or not there is further military escalation, Ukraine is unlikely to recover demographically from the consequences of the war.
Even in 2040 it will have only about 35 million inhabitants, around 20% fewer than before the war (2021: 42.8 million) and the decline in the working-age population is likely to be the most severe and far-reaching."
The study took different scenarios, from a "best case" (end of the war in 2023 without much further escalation) to a "worst case" (end of the war in 2025 with further escalation) into account.
Flight from war affected especially the southern and eastern regions and especially educated women of child-bearing age and their children.
With an estimate of more than 20% of refugees not returning, study author Maryna Tverdostup concluded that long-term shrinking and will significantly impair the conditions for reconstruction.
Since February 2022, hundreds of thousands of Russians emigrated; estimates range from 370,000 to over 820,000.
Combined with mobilization, this possibly removed roughly half a million to one million working-age males from Russia's population.
Studies report that this will have a demographic effect, especially in Russia, that lasts much longer than the conflict, and Putin's time in office.
According to BBC:
They come from different walks of life.
Some are journalists like us, but there are also IT experts, designers, artists, academics, lawyers, doctors, PR specialists, and linguists.
Most are under 50.
Many share western liberal values and hope Russia will be a democratic country one day.
Some are LGBTQ+.
Sociologists studying the current Russian emigration say there is evidence that those leaving are younger, better educated and wealthier than those staying.
More often they are from bigger cities.
According to Johannes Wachs, "The exodus of skilled human capital, sometimes called brain drain, out of Russia may have a significant effect on the course of the war and the Russian economy in the long run."According to one survey, around 15 percent of those who left returned to Russia, either permanently or to settle their affairs.
Environmental impact
Based on a preliminary assessment, the war has inflicted USD 51 billion in environmental damage in Ukraine; according to a report by the Yale School of the Environment, some 687,000 tons of petrochemicals have burned as a result of shelling, while nearly 1,600 tons of pollutants have leaked into bodies of water.
Hazardous chemicals have contaminated around 70 acres of soil, and likely made agricultural activities temporarily impossible.
Around 30% of Ukraine's land is now littered with explosives and more than 2.4 million hectares of forest have been damaged.
According to Netherlands-based peace organization PAX, Russia's "deliberate targeting of industrial and energy infrastructure" has caused "severe" pollution, and the use of explosive weapons has left "millions of tonnes" of contaminated debris in cities and towns.
In early June 2023, the Kakhovka Dam, under Russian occupation, was damaged, causing flooding and triggering warnings of an "ecological disaster."The Ukrainian government, international observers and journalists have described the damage as ecocide.
The Ukrainian government is investigating more crimes against the environment and ecocide (a crime in Ukraine).
Zelenskyy has met with prominent European figures (Heidi Hautala, Margot Wallstrom, Mary Robinson and Greta Thunberg) to discuss the environmental damage and how to prosecute it.
Peace efforts
Peace negotiations between Russia and Ukraine took place on 28 February, 3 March, and 7 March 2022, in the Gomel Region on the Belarus–Ukraine border, with further talks held on 10 March in Turkey and a fourth round of negotiations beginning 14 March.
On 13 July, Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said that peace talks were frozen and Ukraine must first recover the lost territories in the east of the country, before negotiations come.
On 19 July, former Russian President and current Deputy head of the Russian Security Council Dmitry Medvedev, said: "Russia will achieve all its goals.
There will be peace – on our terms."Putin's spokesperson Dmitry Peskov and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that any peace plan could only proceed from Ukraine's recognition of Russia's sovereignty over the regions it annexed from Ukraine in September 2022.
By 29 December, following the Russian declared annexation of multiple Ukrainian oblasts, hopes for Ukrainian peace talks with Russia dimmed significantly with Russia taking a hardline position that the full Russian occupation of the four oblasts would be non-negotiable under any circumstances.
In addition, Zelenskyy announced that Ukraine would not hold peace talks with Russia while Putin was president and signed a decree to ban such talks.
In January 2023, Putin's spokesperson Peskov said that "there is currently no prospect for diplomatic means of settling the situation around Ukraine."In May 2023, UN Secretary-General António Guterres said peace negotiations to end the Russo-Ukrainian War were "not possible at this moment", saying it was clear that Russia and Ukraine were "completely absorbed in this war" and each "convinced that they can win."In June 2023, Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov said that the peace plans presented by China, Brazil and Indonesia are attempts at mediation on behalf of Russia, and "they all currently want to be mediators on Russia's side.
That's why this sort of mediation currently doesnot fit for us at all because they arenot impartial."
He said that Ukraine was willing to accept China as a mediator only if Beijing could convince Russia to withdraw from all the territories it had occupied.
See also ==
Outline of the Russo-Ukrainian War
2020s in military history
List of conflicts in territory of the former Soviet Union
List of conflicts in Europe
List of interstate wars since 1945
List of invasions and occupations of Ukraine
List of ongoing armed conflicts
List of wars between Russia and Ukraine
List of wars: 2003–present
Russian emigration following the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Red lines in the Russo-Ukrainian War
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
The UN and the war in Ukraine at the United Nations
Think Tank reports on the invasion of Ukraine at the Council of the European Union
Russian invasion of Ukraine at Google News
Ukraine conflict updates at the Institute for the Study of War
Interactive Map: Russia's Invasion of Ukraine at the Institute for the Study of War
Interactive Time-lapse: Russia's War in Ukraine at the Institute for the Study of War
The Russo-Ukrainian War is an ongoing international conflict between Russia and Ukraine, which began in February 2014.
Following Ukraine's Revolution of Dignity, Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine and supported pro-Russian separatists fighting the Ukrainian military in the Donbas war.
The first eight years of conflict also included naval incidents, cyberwarfare, and heightened political tensions.
In February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine and began occupying more of the country.
In early 2014, the Euromaidan protests led to the Revolution of Dignity and the ousting of Ukraine's pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych.
Shortly after, pro-Russian unrest erupted in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Simultaneously, unmarked Russian troops moved into Ukraine's Crimea and took over government buildings, strategic sites and infrastructure.
Russia soon annexed Crimea after a highly-disputed referendum.
In April 2014, armed pro-Russian separatists seized government buildings in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region and proclaimed the Donetsk People's Republic (DPR) and the Luhansk People's Republic (LPR) as independent states, starting the Donbas war.
The separatists received considerable but covert support from Russia, and Ukrainian attempts to fully retake separatist-held areas failed.
Although Russia denied involvement, Russian troops took part in the fighting.
In February 2015, Russia and Ukraine signed the Minsk II agreements to end the conflict, but they were never fully implemented in the years that followed.
The Donbas war settled into a violent but static conflict between Ukraine and the Russian and separatist forces, with many brief ceasefires but no lasting peace and few changes in territorial control.
Beginning in 2021, Russia built up a large military presence near its border with Ukraine, including within neighbouring Belarus.
Russian officials repeatedly denied plans to attack Ukraine.
Russian president Vladimir Putin criticized the enlargement of NATO and demanded that Ukraine be barred from ever joining the military alliance.
He also expressed irredentist views and questioned Ukraine's right to exist.
Russia recognized the DPR and LPR as independent states in February 2022.
Putin announced a "special military operation" to "demilitarize and denazify" Ukraine, claiming Russia had no plans to occupy the country.
Russian forces invaded Ukraine.
The invasion was internationally condemned; many countries imposed sanctions against Russia and increased existing sanctions.
Russia abandoned an attempt to take Kyiv in early April 2022 amid fierce resistance.
From August, Ukrainian forces began recapturing territories in the north-east and south.
In late September, Russia declared the annexation of four partially-occupied regions of Ukraine, which was internationally condemned.
Russia spent the winter conducting inconclusive offensives in the Donbas, and in spring 2023 dug into positions ahead of another Ukrainian counteroffensive.
The war has resulted in a refugee crisis and tens of thousands of deaths.
Background
Independent Ukraine and the Orange Revolution
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union (USSR) in 1991, Ukraine and Russia maintained close ties.
In 1994, Ukraine agreed to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-weapon state.
Former Soviet nuclear weapons in Ukraine were removed and dismantled.
In return, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States agreed to uphold the territorial integrity and political independence of Ukraine through the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances.
In 1999, Russia was one of the signatories of the Charter for European Security, which "reaffirmed the inherent right of each and every participating State to be free to choose or change its security arrangements, including treaties of alliance, as they evolve."
In the years after the dissolution of the USSR, several former Eastern Bloc countries joined NATO, partly in response to regional security threats involving Russia such as the 1993 Russian constitutional crisis, the War in Abkhazia (1992–1993) and the First Chechen War (1994–1996).
Putin claimed Western powers broke promises not to let any Eastern European countries join.
The 2004 Ukrainian presidential election was controversial.
During the election campaign, opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned by TCDD dioxin; he later accused Russia of involvement.
In November, Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych was declared the winner, despite allegations of vote-rigging by election observers.
During a two-month period which became known as the Orange Revolution, large peaceful protests successfully challenged the outcome.
After the Supreme Court of Ukraine annulled the initial result due to widespread electoral fraud, a second round re-run was held, bringing to power Yushchenko as president and Yulia Tymoshenko as prime minister, and leaving Yanukovych in opposition.
The Orange Revolution is often grouped together with other early-21st century protest movements, particularly within the former USSR, known as colour revolutions.
According to Anthony Cordesman, Russian military officers viewed such colour revolutions as attempts by the US and European states to destabilise neighbouring countries and undermine Russia's national security.
Russian President Vladimir Putin accused organisers of the 2011–2013 Russian protests of being former advisors to Yushchenko, and described the protests as an attempt to transfer the Orange Revolution to Russia.
Rallies in favour of Putin during this period were called "anti-Orange protests".At the 2008 Bucharest summit, Ukraine and Georgia sought to join NATO.
The response among NATO members was divided;
Western European countries opposed offering Membership Action Plans (MAP) in order to avoid antagonising Russia, while US President George W. Bush pushed for their admission.
NATO ultimately refused to offer Ukraine and Georgia MAPs, but also issued a statement agreeing that "these countries will become members of NATO" at some point.
Putin voiced strong opposition to Georgia and Ukraine's NATO membership bids.
By January 2022, the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO remained remote.
In 2009, Yanukovych announced his intent to again run for president in the 2010 Ukrainian presidential election, which he subsequently won.
In November 2013, a wave of large, pro-European Union (EU) protests erupted in response to Yanukovych's sudden decision not to sign the EU–Ukraine Association Agreement, instead choosing closer ties to Russia and the Eurasian Economic Union.
On 22 February 2013 the Ukrainian parliament had overwhelmingly approved of finalizing the agreement with the EU, subsequent to which Russia had put pressure on Ukraine to reject it using the threat of sanctions, with Kremlin adviser Sergei Glazyev pronouncing that if the agreement was signed Russia could not guarantee Ukraine's status as a state.
Euromaidan, Revolution of Dignity, and pro-Russian unrest
Following months of protests as part of the Euromaidan movement, on 21 February 2014 Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition signed a settlement agreement that called for early elections.
The following day, Yanukovych fled from the capital ahead of an impeachment vote that stripped him of his powers as president.
On 23 February, the Rada adopted a bill to repeal the 2012 law which gave the Russian language an official status.
The bill was not enacted; however, the proposal provoked negative reactions in the Russian-speaking regions of Ukraine, intensified by Russian media saying that the ethnic Russian population was in imminent danger.
On 27 February, an interim government was established and early presidential elections were scheduled.
The following day, Yanukovych resurfaced in Russia and in a press conference declared that he remained the acting president of Ukraine, just as Russia was beginning its overt military campaign in Crimea.
Leaders of Russian-speaking eastern regions of Ukraine declared continuing loyalty to Yanukovych, causing the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine.
Russian military bases in Crimea
At the onset of the conflict, Russia had roughly 12,000 military personnel in the Black Sea Fleet, in several locations in the Crimean peninsula like Sevastopol, Kacha, Hvardiiske, Simferopol Raion, Sarych, and others.
In 2005 a dispute broke out over control of the Sarych cape lighthouse near Yalta, and a number of other beacons.
Russian presence was allowed by the basing and transit agreement with Ukraine.
Under the agreements the Russian military in Crimea was constrained to a maximum of 25,000 troops; they were required to: respect the sovereignty of Ukraine, honor its legislation, not interfere in the internal affairs of the country, and show their "military identification cards" when crossing the international border.
Early in the conflict, the agreement's sizeable troop limit allowed Russia to significantly reinforce its military presence under the plausible guise of security concerns, deploy special forces and other required capabilities to conduct the operation in Crimea.
According to the original treaty on the division of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet signed in 1997, Russia was allowed to have its military bases in Crimea until 2017, after which it would evacuate all military units including its portion of the Black Sea Fleet out of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol.
On 21 April 2010, former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych signed a new deal known as the Kharkiv Pact, to resolve the 2009 Russia–Ukraine gas dispute; it extended the stay to 2042 with an option to renew.
Legality and declaration of war
No formal declaration of war has been issued in the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War.
When Putin announced the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, he claimed to commence a "special military operation", side-stepping a formal declaration of war.
The statement was, however, regarded as a declaration of war by the Ukrainian government and reported as such by many international news sources.
While the Ukrainian parliament refers to Russia as a "terrorist state" in regard to its military actions in Ukraine, it has not issued a formal declaration of war on its behalf.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine violated international law (including the Charter of the United Nations).
The invasion has also been called a crime of aggression under international criminal law and under some countries' domestic criminal codes – including those of Ukraine and Russia – although procedural obstacles exist to prosecutions under these laws.
History
Russian annexation of Crimea (2014)
On 20 February 2014, Russia began an annexation of Crimea.
On 22 and 23 February, in the relative power vacuum immediately after the ousting of Yanukovych, Russian troops and special forces began moving into Crimea through Novorossiysk.
On 27 February, Russian forces without insignias began their advance into the Crimean Peninsula.
They took strategic positions and captured the Crimean Parliament, raising a Russian flag.
Security checkpoints isolated the Crimean Peninsula from the rest of Ukraine and restricted movement within the territory.
In the following days, Russian soldiers secured key airports and a communications center.
Russian cyberattacks shut down websites associated with the Ukrainian government, news media, and social media.
Cyberattacks also enabled Russian access to the mobile phones of Ukrainian officials and members of parliament, further disrupting communications.
On 1 March, the Russian legislature approved the use of armed forces, leading to an influx of Russian troops and military hardware into the peninsula.
In the following days, all remaining Ukrainian military bases and installations were surrounded and besieged, including the Southern Naval Base.
After Russia formally annexed the peninsula on 18 March, Ukrainian military bases and ships were stormed by Russian forces.
On 24 March, Ukraine ordered troops to withdraw; by 30 March, all Ukrainian forces had left the peninsula.
On 15 April, the Ukrainian parliament declared Crimea a territory temporarily occupied by Russia.
After the annexation, the Russian government increased its military presence in the region and made nuclear threats.
Putin said that a Russian military task force would be established in Crimea.
In November, NATO stated that it believed Russia was deploying nuclear-capable weapons to Crimea.
Since the annexation of Crimea, certain NATO members have been providing training for the Ukrainian army.
War in the Donbas (2014–2015)
Pro-Russia unrest
From late February 2014, demonstrations by pro-Russian and anti-government groups took place in major cities across the eastern and southern regions of Ukraine.
The first protests across southern and eastern Ukraine were largely native expressions of discontent with the new Ukrainian government.
Russian involvement at this stage was limited to voicing support for the demonstrations.
Russia exploited this, however, launching a coordinated political and military campaign against Ukraine.
Putin gave legitimacy to the separatists when he described the Donbas as part of "New Russia" (Novorossiya), and expressed bewilderment as to how the region had ever become part of Ukraine.
Russia continued to marshal forces near Ukraine's eastern border in late March, reaching 30–40,000 troops by April.
The deployment was used to threaten escalation and disrupt Ukraine's response.
This threat forced Ukraine to divert forces to its borders instead of the conflict zone.
Ukrainian authorities cracked down on the pro-Russian protests and arrested local separatist leaders in early March.
Those leaders were replaced by people with ties to the Russian security services and interests in Russian businesses.
By April 2014, Russian citizens had taken control of the separatist movement, supported by volunteers and materiel from Russia, including Chechen and Cossack fighters.
According to Donetsk People's Republic (DPR) commander Igor Girkin, without this support in April, the movement would have dissipated, as it had in Kharkiv and Odesa.
The separatist groups held disputed referendums in May, which were not recognised by Ukraine or any other UN member state.
Armed conflict ====
In April, armed conflict began in eastern Ukraine between Russian-backed separatist forces and Ukraine.
The separatists declared the People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
From 6 April, militants occupied government buildings in many cities and took control of border crossings to Russia, transport hubs, a broadcasting center, and other strategic infrastructure.
On 12 April several armed groups took cities of Sloviansk, Kramatorsk and then Horlivka, Druzhkivka in subsequent days.
They were led by people like retired Russian colonel Igor Girkin and lieutenant colonel Igor Bezler.
Faced with continued expansion of separatist territorial control, on 15 April the interim Ukrainian government launched an "Anti-Terrorist Operation" (ATO); however, Ukrainian forces were poorly prepared and ill-positioned and the operation quickly stalled.
By the end of April, Ukraine announced it had lost control of the provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk.
It claimed to be on "full combat alert" against a possible Russian invasion and reinstated conscription to its armed forces.
Through May, the Ukrainian campaign focused on containing the separatists by securing key positions around the ATO zone to position the military for a decisive offensive once Ukraine's national mobilization had completed.
As conflict between the separatists and the Ukrainian government escalated in May, Russia began to employ a "hybrid approach", combining disinformation tactics, irregular fighters, regular Russian troops, and conventional military support.
The First Battle of Donetsk Airport followed the Ukrainian presidential elections.
It marked a turning point in conflict; it was the first battle between the separatists and the Ukrainian government that involved large numbers of Russian "volunteers".: 15  According to Ukraine, at the height of the conflict in the summer of 2014, Russian paramilitaries made up between 15% and 80% of the combatants.
From June Russia trickled in arms, armor, and munitions.
On 17 July 2014, Russian-controlled forces shot down a passenger aircraft, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, as it was flying over eastern Ukraine.
Investigations and the recovery of bodies began in the conflict zone as fighting continued.
By the end of July, Ukrainian forces were pushing into cities, to cut off supply routes between the two, isolating Donetsk and attempting to restore control of the Russo-Ukrainian border.
By 28 July, the strategic heights of Savur-Mohyla were under Ukrainian control, along with the town of Debaltseve, an important railroad hub.
These operational successes of Ukrainian forces threatened the existence of the DPR and LPR statelets, prompting Russian cross-border shelling targeted at Ukrainian troops on their own soil, from mid-July onwards.
August 2014 Russian invasion
After a series of military defeats and setbacks for the separatists, who united under the banner of "Novorossiya", Russia dispatched what it called a "humanitarian convoy" of trucks across the border in mid-August 2014.
Ukraine called the move a "direct invasion".
Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council reported that convoys were arriving almost daily in November (up to 9 convoys on 30 November) and that their contents were mainly arms and ammunition.
Strelkov claimed that in early August, Russian servicemen, supposedly on "vacation" from the army, began to arrive in Donbas.
By August 2014, the Ukrainian "Anti-Terrorist Operation" shrank the territory under pro-Russian control, and approached the border.
Igor Girkin urged Russian military intervention, and said that the combat inexperience of his irregular forces, along with recruitment difficulties amongst the local population, had caused the setbacks.
He stated, "Losing this war on the territory that President Vladimir Putin personally named New Russia would threaten the Kremlin's power and, personally, the power of the president".In response to the deteriorating situation, Russia abandoned its hybrid approach, and began a conventional invasion on 25 August 2014.
On the following day, the Russian Defence Ministry said these soldiers had crossed the border "by accident".
According to Nikolai Mitrokhin's estimates, by mid-August 2014 during the Battle of Ilovaisk, between 20,000 and 25,000 troops were fighting in the Donbas on the separatist side, and only 40–45% were "locals".On 24 August 2014, Amvrosiivka was occupied by Russian paratroopers, supported by 250 armoured vehicles and artillery pieces.
The same day, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko referred to the operation as Ukraine's "Patriotic War of 2014" and a war against external aggression.
On 25 August, a column of Russian military vehicles was reported to have crossed into Ukraine near Novoazovsk on the Azov sea coast.
It appeared headed towards Ukrainian-held Mariupol, in an area that had not seen pro-Russian presence for weeks.
Russian forces captured Novoazovsk. and Russian soldiers began deporting Ukrainians who did not have an address registered within the town.
Pro-Ukrainian anti-war protests took place in Mariupol.
The UN Security Council called an emergency meeting.
The Pskov-based 76th Guards Air Assault Division allegedly entered Ukrainian territory in August and engaged in a skirmish near Luhansk, suffering 80 dead.
The Ukrainian Defence Ministry said that they had seized two of the unit's armoured vehicles near Luhansk, and reported destroying another three tanks and two armoured vehicles in other regions.
The Russian government denied the skirmish took place, but on 18 August, the 76th was awarded the Order of Suvorov, one of Russia's highest awards, by Russian minister of defence Sergey Shoigu for the "successful completion of military missions" and "courage and heroism".The speaker of Russia's upper house of parliament and Russian state television channels acknowledged that Russian soldiers entered Ukraine, but referred to them as "volunteers".
A reporter for Novaya Gazeta, an opposition newspaper in Russia, stated that the Russian military leadership paid soldiers to resign their commissions and fight in Ukraine in the early summer of 2014, and then began ordering soldiers into Ukraine.
Russian opposition MP Lev Shlosberg made similar statements, although he said combatants from his country are "regular Russian troops", disguised as units of the DPR and LPR.In early September 2014, Russian state-owned television channels reported on the funerals of Russian soldiers who had died in Ukraine, but described them as "volunteers" fighting for the "Russian world".
Valentina Matviyenko, a top United Russia politician, also praised "volunteers" fighting in "our fraternal nation".
Russian state television for the first time showed the funeral of a soldier killed fighting in Ukraine.
Mariupol offensive and first Minsk ceasefire
On 3 September, Poroshenko said he and Putin had reached a "permanent ceasefire" agreement.
Russia denied this, denying that it was a party to the conflict, adding that "they only discussed how to settle the conflict".
Poroshenko then recanted.
On 5 September Russia's Permanent OSCE Representative Andrey Kelin, said that it was natural that pro-Russian separatists "are going to liberate" Mariupol.
Ukrainian forces stated that Russian intelligence groups had been spotted in the area.
Kelin said 'there might be volunteers over there.'
On 4 September 2014, a NATO officer said that several thousand regular Russian forces wereoperating in Ukraine.
On 5 September 2014, the Minsk Protocol ceasefire agreement drew a line of demarcation between Ukraine and separatist-controlled portions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts.
End of 2014 and Minsk II agreement
On 7 and 12 November, NATO officials reconfirmed the Russian presence, citing 32 tanks, 16 howitzer cannons and 30 trucks of troops entering the country.
US general Philip M. Breedlove said "Russian tanks, Russian artillery, Russian air defence systems and Russian combat troops" had been sighted.
NATO said it had seen an increase in Russian tanks, artillery pieces and other heavy military equipment in Ukraine and renewed its call for Moscow to withdraw its forces.
The Chicago Council on Global Affairs stated that Russian separatists enjoyed technical advantages over the Ukrainian army since the large inflow of advanced military systems in mid-2014: effective anti-aircraft weapons ("Buk", MANPADS) suppressed Ukrainian air strikes, Russian drones provided intelligence, and Russian secure communications system disrupted Ukrainian communications intelligence.
The Russian side employed electronic warfare systems that Ukraine lacked.
Similar conclusions about the technical advantage of the Russian separatists were voiced by the Conflict Studies Research Centre.
In the 12 November United Nations Security Council meeting, the United Kingdom's representative accused Russia of intentionally constraining OSCE observation missions' capabilities, pointing out that the observers were allowed to monitor only two kilometers of border, and drones deployed to extend their capabilities were jammed or shot down.
In January 2015, Donetsk, Luhansk, and Mariupol represented the three battle fronts.
Poroshenko described a dangerous escalation on 21 January amid reports of more than 2,000 additional Russian troops, 200 tanks and armed personnel carriers crossing the border.
He abbreviated his visit to the World Economic Forum because of his concerns.
A new package of measures to end the conflict, known as Minsk II, was agreed on 15 February 2015.
On 18 February, Ukrainian forces withdrew from Debatlseve, in the last high-intensity battle of the Donbas war until 2022.
In September 2015 the United Nations Human Rights Office estimated that 8000 casualties had resulted from the conflict.
Line of conflict stabilizes (2015–2021)
After the Minsk agreements, the war settled into static trench warfare around the agreed line of contact, with few changes in territorial control.
The conflict was marked by artillery duels, special forces operations, and trench warfare.
Hostilities never ceased for a substantial period of time, but continued at a low level despite repeated attempts at ceasefire.
In the months after the fall of Debaltseve, minor skirmishes continued along the line of contact, but no territorial changes occurred.
Both sides began fortifying their position by building networks of trenches, bunkers and tunnels, turning the conflict into static trench warfare.
The relatively static conflict was labelled a "frozen" by some, but Russia never achieved this as the fighting never stopped.
Between 2014 and 2022 there were 29 ceasefires, each agreed to remain in force indefinitely.
However, none of them lasted more than two weeks.
US and international officials continued to report the active presence of Russian military in eastern Ukraine, including in the Debaltseve area.
In 2015, Russian separatist forces were estimated to number around 36,000 troops (compared to 34,000 Ukrainian), of whom 8,500–10,000 were Russian soldiers.
Additionally, around 1,000 GRU troops were operating in the area.
Another 2015 estimate held that Ukrainian forces outnumbered Russian forces 40,000 to 20,000.
In 2017, on average one Ukrainian soldier died in combat every three days, with an estimated 6,000 Russian and 40,000 separatist troops in the region.
Cases of killed and wounded Russian soldiers were discussed in local Russian media.
Recruiting for Donbas was performed openly via veteran and paramilitary organisations.
Vladimir Yefimov, leader of one such organisation, explained how the process worked in the Ural area.
The organisation recruited mostly army veterans, but also policemen, firefighters etc. with military experience.
The cost of equipping one volunteer was estimated at 350,000 rubles (around $6500) plus salary of 60,000 to 240,000 rubles per month.
The recruits received weapons only after arriving in the conflict zone.
Often, Russian troops traveled disguised as Red Cross personnel.
Igor Trunov, head of the Russian Red Cross in Moscow, condemned these convoys, saying they complicated humanitarian aid delivery.
Russia refused to allow OSCE to expand its mission beyond two border crossings.
The volunteers were issued a document claiming that their participation was limited to "offering humanitarian help" to avoid Russian mercenary laws.
Russia's anti-mercenary legislation defined a mercenary as someone who "takes part [in fighting] with aims counter to the interests of the Russian Federation".
In August 2016, the Ukrainian intelligence service, the SBU, published telephone intercepts from 2014 of Sergey Glazyev (Russian presidential adviser), Konstantin Zatulin, and other people in which they discussed covert funding of pro-Russian activists in Eastern Ukraine, the occupation of administration buildings and other actions that triggered the conflict.
As early as February 2014, Glazyev gave direct instructions to various pro-Russian parties on how to take over local administration offices, what to do afterwards, how to formulate demands, and promised support from Russia, including "sending our guys".
2018 Kerch Strait incident
Russia gained de facto control of the Kerch Strait in 2014.
In 2017, Ukraine appealed to a court of arbitration over the use of the strait.
By 2018 Russia had built a bridge over the strait, limiting the size of ships that could pass through, imposed new regulations, and repeatedly detained Ukrainian vessels.
On 25 November 2018, three Ukrainian boats traveling from Odesa to Mariupol were seized by Russian warships;
24 Ukrainian sailors were detained.
A day later on 26 November 2018, the Ukrainian parliament overwhelmingly backed the imposition of martial law along Ukraine's coastal regions and those bordering Russia.
2019–2020
More than 110 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the conflict in 2019.
In May 2019, newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy took office promising to end the war in Donbas.
In December 2019, Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists began swapping prisoners of war.
Around 200 prisoners were exchanged on 29 December 2019.
According to Ukrainian authorities, 50 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in 2020.
Since 2019, Russia has issued over 650,000 internal Russian passports to Ukrainians.
Russian military buildup around Ukraine (2021–2022)
From March to April 2021, Russia commenced a major military build-up near the border, followed by a second build-up between October 2021 to February 2022 in Russia and Belarus.
Throughout, the Russian government repeatedly denied it had plans to attack Ukraine.
In early December 2021, following Russian denials, the US released intelligence of Russian invasion plans, including satellite photographs showing Russian troops and equipment near the border.
The intelligence reported a Russian list of key sites and individuals to be killed or neutralized.
The US released multiple reports that accurately predicted the invasion plans.
Russian accusations and demands
In the months preceding the invasion, Russian officials accused Ukraine of inciting tensions, Russophobia, and repressing Russian speakers.
They made multiple security demands of Ukraine, NATO, and other EU countries.
On 9 December 2021 Putin said that "Russophobia is a first step towards genocide".
Putin's claims were dismissed by the international community, and Russian claims of genocide were rejected as baseless.
In a 21 February speech, Putin questioned the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state, repeating an inaccurate claim that "Ukraine never had a tradition of genuine statehood".
He incorrectly stated that Vladimir Lenin had created Ukraine, by carving a separate Soviet Republic out of what Putin said was Russian land, and that Nikita Khrushchev "took Crimea away from Russia for some reason and gave it to Ukraine" in 1954.Putin falsely claimed that Ukrainian society and government were dominated by neo-Nazism, invoking the history of collaboration in German-occupied Ukraine during World War II, and echoing an antisemitic conspiracy theory that cast Russian Christians, rather than Jews, as the true victims of Nazi Germany.
Ukraine does have a far-right fringe, including the neo-Nazi linked Azov Battalion and Right Sector.
Analysts described Putin's rhetoric as greatly exaggerated.
Zelenskyy, who is Jewish, stated that his grandfather served in the Soviet army fighting against the Nazis; three of his family members were killed in the Holocaust.
During the second build-up, Russia demanded a treaty that would forbid Ukraine from ever joining NATO, and end all NATO activity in its Eastern European member states.
These demands were rejected.
A treaty to prevent Ukraine joining NATO would go against the alliance's "open door" policy and the principle of self-determination, although NATO made no efforts to comply with Ukraine's requests to join.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg replied that "Russia has no say" on whether Ukraine joins, and that "Russia has no right to establish a sphere of influence to try to control their neighbors".
NATO offered to improve communications with Russia and discuss missile placements and military exercises, as long as Russia withdrew troops from Ukraine's borders, but Russia did not withdraw.
Prelude to full invasion ====
Fighting in Donbas escalated significantly from 17 February 2022 onwards.
The Ukrainians and the pro-Russian separatists each accused the other of attacks.
There was a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas, which was considered by Ukraine and its supporters to be an attempt to provoke the Ukrainian army or create a pretext for invasion.
On 18 February, the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics ordered mandatory emergency evacuations of civilians from their respective capital cities, although observers noted that full evacuations would take months.
The Russian government intensified its disinformation campaign, with Russian state media promoting fabricated videos (false flags) on a nearly hourly basis purporting to show Ukrainian forces attacking Russia.
Many of the disinformation videos were amateurish, and evidence showed that the claimed attacks, explosions, and evacuations in Donbas were staged by Russia.
On 21 February at 22:35 (UTC+3), Putin announced that the Russian government would diplomatically recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics.
The same evening, Putin directed that Russian troops deploy into Donbas, in what Russia referred to as a "peacekeeping mission".
On 22 February, the Federation Council unanimously authorised Putin to use military force outside Russia.
In response, Zelenskyy ordered the conscription of army reservists;
The following day, Ukraine's parliament proclaimed a 30-day nationwide state of emergency and ordered the mobilisation of all reservists.
Russia began to evacuate its embassy in Kyiv.
On the night of 23 February, Zelenskyy gave a speech in Russian in which he appealed to the citizens of Russia to prevent war.
He rejected Russia's claims about neo-Nazis and stated that he had no intention of attacking the Donbas.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said on 23 February that the separatist leaders in Donetsk and Luhansk had sent a letter to Putin stating that Ukrainian shelling had caused civilian deaths and appealing for military support.
Full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine (2022–present)
The Russian invasion of Ukraine began on the morning of 24 February 2022, when Putin announced a "special military operation" to "demilitarise and denazify" Ukraine.
Minutes later, missiles and airstrikes hit across Ukraine, including Kyiv, shortly followed by a large ground invasion along multiple fronts.
Zelenskyy declared martial law and a general mobilisation of all male Ukrainian citizens between 18 and 60, who were banned from leaving the country.
Russian attacks were initially launched on a northern front from Belarus towards Kyiv, a southern front from Crimea, and a south-eastern front from Luhansk and Donetsk and towards Kharkiv.
In the northern front, amidst heavy losses and strong Ukrainian resistance surrounding Kyiv, Russia's advance stalled in March, and by April its troops retreated.
On 8 April, Russia placed its forces in southern and eastern Ukraine under the command of General Aleksandr Dvornikov, and some units withdrawn from the north were redeployed to the Donbas.
On 19 April, Russia launched a renewed attack across a 500 kilometres (300 mi) long front extending from Kharkiv to Donetsk and Luhansk.
By 13 May, a Ukraine counter-offensive had driven back Russian forces near Kharkiv.
By 20 May, Mariupol fell to Russian troops following a prolonged siege of the Azovstal steel works.
Russian forces continued to bomb both military and civilian targets far from the frontline.
The war caused the largest refugee and humanitarian crisis within Europe since the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s; the UN described it as the fastest-growing such crisis since World War II.
In the first week of the invasion, the UN reported over a million refugees had fled Ukraine; this subsequently rose to over 7,405,590 by 24 September, a reduction from over eight million due to some refugees' return.
Ukrainian forces launched counteroffensives in the south in August, and in the northeast in September.
On 30 September, Russia annexed four oblasts of Ukraine which it had partially conquered during the invasion.
This annexation was generally unrecognized and condemned by the countries of the world.
After Putin announced that he would begin conscription drawn from the 300,000 citizens with military training and potentially the pool of about 25 million Russians who could be eligible for conscription, one-way tickets out of the country nearly or completely sold out.
The Ukrainian offensive in the northeast successfully recaptured the majority of Kharkiv Oblast in September.
In the course of the southern counteroffensive, Ukraine retook the city of Kherson in November and Russian forces withdrew to the east bank of the Dnieper River.
The invasion was internationally condemned as a war of aggression.
A United Nations General Assembly resolution demanded a full withdrawal of Russian forces, the International Court of Justice ordered Russia to suspend military operations and the Council of Europe expelled Russia.
Many countries imposed new sanctions, which affected the economies of Russia and the world, and provided humanitarian and military aid to Ukraine.
In September 2022, Putin signed a law that would punish anyone who resists conscription with a 10-year prison sentence resulting in an international push to allow asylum for Russians fleeing conscription.
According to an estimate published by The New York Times, as of February 2023, the "number of Russian troops killed and wounded in Ukraine is approaching 200,000."
Human rights violations
Violations of human rights and atrocity crimes have both occurred during the war.
From 2014 to 2021, there were more than 3,000 civilian casualties, with most occurring in 2014 and 2015.
The right of movement was impeded for the inhabitants of the conflict zone.
Arbitrary detention was practiced by both sides in the first years of the conflict.
It decreased after 2016 in government-held areas, while in the separatist-held ones it continued.
Investigations into the abuses committed by both sides made little progress.
Since the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Russian authorities and armed forces have committed multiple war crimes in the form of deliberate attacks against civilian targets, massacres of civilians, torture and rape of women and children, and indiscriminate attacks in densely populated areas.
After the Russian withdrawal from areas north of Kyiv, overwhelming evidence of war crimes by Russian forces was discovered.
In particular, in the town of Bucha, evidence emerged of a massacre of civilians perpetrated by Russian troops, including torture, mutilation, rape, looting and deliberate killings of civilians. the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (OHCHR) has documented the murder of at least 73 civilians – mostly men, but also women and children – in Bucha.
More than 1,200 bodies of civilians were found in the Kyiv region after Russian forces withdrew, some of them summarily executed.
There were reports of forced deportations of thousands of civilians, including children, to Russia, mainly from Russian-occupied Mariupol, as well as sexual violence, including cases of rape, sexual assault and gang rape, and deliberate killing of Ukrainian civilians by Russian forces.
Ukrainian forces have also been accused of committing various war crimes, including mistreatment of detainees, though on a much smaller scale than Russian forces.
Related issues
Spillover
On 19 September, CNN reported that it was "likely" that Ukrainian Special Operations Forces were behind a series of drone strikes and a ground operation directed against the Wagner-backed RSF near Khartoum on 8 September.
Kyrylo Budanov, chief of the Main Directorate of Intelligence of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine, stated in an interview on 22 September that he could neither deny nor confirm the involvement of Ukraine in the conflict in Sudan, but said that Ukraine would punish Russian war criminals anywhere in the world.
Gas disputes
Until 2014 Ukraine was the main transit route for Russian natural gas sold to Europe, which earned Ukraine about US$3 billion a year in transit fees, making it the country's most lucrative export service.
Following Russia's launch of the Nord Stream pipeline, which bypasses Ukraine, gas transit volumes steadily decreased.
Following the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War in February 2014, severe tensions extended to the gas sector.
The subsequent outbreak of war in the Donbas region forced the suspension of a project to develop Ukraine's own shale gas reserves at the Yuzivska gas field, which had been planned as a way to reduce Ukrainian dependence on Russian gas imports.
Eventually, the EU commissioner for energy Günther Oettinger was called in to broker a deal securing supplies to Ukraine and transit to the EU.An explosion damaged a Ukrainian portion of the Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast in May 2014.
Ukrainian officials blamed Russian terrorists.
Another section of the pipeline exploded in the Poltava Oblast on 17 June 2014, one day after Russia limited the supply of gas to Ukrainian customers due to non-payment.
Ukraine's Interior Minister Arsen Avakov said the following day that the explosion had been caused by a bomb.
In 2015, Russian state media reported that Russia planned to completely abandon gas supplies to Europe through Ukraine after 2018.
Russia's state-owned energy giant Gazprom had already substantially reduced the volumes of gas transited across Ukraine, and expressed its intention to reduce the level further by means of transit-diversification pipelines (Turkish Stream, Nord Stream, etc.).
Gazprom and Ukraine agreed to a five-year deal on Russian gas transit to Europe at the end of 2019.In 2020, the TurkStream natural gas pipeline running from Russia to Turkey changed the regional gas flows in South-East Europe by diverting the transit through Ukraine and the Trans Balkan Pipeline system.
In May 2021, the Biden administration waived Trump's CAATSA sanctions on the company behind Russia's Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany.
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy said he was "surprised" and "disappointed" by Joe Biden's decision.
In July 2021, the U.S. urged Ukraine not to criticise a forthcoming agreement with Germany over the pipeline.
In July 2021, Biden and German Chancellor Angela Merkel concluded a deal that the U.S. might trigger sanctions if Russia used Nord Stream as a "political weapon".
The deal aimed to prevent Poland and Ukraine from being cut off from Russian gas supplies.
Ukraine will get a $50 million loan for green technology until 2024 and Germany will set up a billion dollar fund to promote Ukraine's transition to green energy to compensate for the loss of the gas-transit fees.
The contract for transiting Russian gas through Ukraine will be prolonged until 2034, if the Russian government agrees.
In August 2021, Zelenskyy warned that the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline between Russia and Germany was "a dangerous weapon, not only for Ukraine but for the whole of Europe."
In September 2021, Ukraine's Naftogaz CEO Yuriy Vitrenko accused Russia of using natural gas as a "geopolitical weapon".
Vitrenko stated that "A joint statement from the United States and Germany said that if the Kremlin used gas as a weapon, there would be an appropriate response.
We are now waiting for the imposition of sanctions on a 100% subsidiary of Gazprom, the operator of Nord Stream 2."
Hybrid warfare ===
The Russo-Ukrainian conflict has also included elements of hybrid warfare using non-traditional means.
Cyberwarfare has been used by Russia in operations including successful attacks on the Ukrainian power grid in December 2015 and in December 2016, which was the first successful cyber attack on a power grid, and the Mass hacker supply-chain attack in June 2017, which the US claimed was the largest known cyber attack.
In retaliation, Ukrainian operations have included the Surkov Leaks in October 2016 which released 2,337 e-mails in relation to Russian plans for seizing Crimea from Ukraine and fomenting separatist unrest in Donbas.
The Russian information war against Ukraine has been another front of hybrid warfare waged by Russia.
A Russian fifth column in Ukraine has also been claimed to exist among the Party of Regions, the Communist Party, the Progressive Socialist Party and the Russian Orthodox Church.
Russian propaganda and disinformation campaigns
False stories have been used to provoke public outrage during the war.
In April 2014, Russian news channels Russia-1 and NTV showed a man saying he was attacked by a fascist Ukrainian gang on one channel and on the other channel saying he was funding the training of right-wing anti-Russia radicals.
A third segment portrayed the man as a neo-Nazi surgeon.
In May 2014, Russia-1 aired a story about Ukrainian atrocities using footage of a 2012 Russian operation in North Caucasus.
In the same month, the Russian news network Life presented a 2013 photograph of a wounded child in Syria as a victim of Ukrainian troops who had just retaken Donetsk International Airport.
In June 2014, several Russian state news outlets reported that Ukraine was using white phosphorus using 2004 footage of white phosphorus being used by the United States in Iraq.
In July 2014, Channel One Russia broadcast an interview with a woman who said that a 3-year-old boy who spoke Russian was crucified by Ukrainian nationalists in a fictitious square in Sloviansk that turned out to be false.
In 2022, Russian state media told stories of genocide and mass graves full of ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine.
One set of graves outside Luhansk was dug when intense fighting in 2014 cut off the electricity in the local morgue.
Amnesty International investigated 2014 Russian claims of mass graves filled with hundreds of bodies and instead found isolated incidents of extrajudicial executions by both sides.
The Russian censorship apparatus Roskomnadzor ordered the country's media to employ information only from Russian state sources or face fines and blocks, and ordered media and schools to describe the war as a "special military operation".
On 4 March 2022, Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish "fake news" about the Russian military and its operations, leading to some media outlets to stop reporting on Ukraine.
Russia's opposition politician Alexei Navalny said the "monstrosity of lies" in the Russian state media "is unimaginable.
And, unfortunately, so is its persuasiveness for those who have no access to alternative information."
He tweeted that "warmongers" among Russian state media personalities "should be treated as war criminals.
From the editors-in-chief to the talk show hosts to the news editors, [they] should be sanctioned now and tried someday."Putin and Russian media have described the government of Ukraine as being led by neo-Nazis persecuting ethnic Russians who are in need of protection by Russia, despite Ukraine's President Zelenskyy being Jewish.
According to journalist Natalia Antonova, "Russia's present-day war of aggression is refashioned by propaganda into a direct continuation of the legacy of the millions of Russian soldiers who died to stop" Nazi Germany in World War II. Ukraine's rejection of the adoption of Russia-initiated General Assembly resolutions on combating the glorification of Nazism, the latest iteration of which is General Assembly Resolution A/C.3/76/L.57/Rev.1 on Combating Glorification of Nazism, Neo-Nazism and other Practices that Contribute to Fueling Contemporary Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, serve to present Ukraine as a pro-Nazi state, and indeed likely forms the basis for Russia's claims, with the only other state rejecting the adoption of the resolution being the US.
The Deputy US Representative for ECOSOC describes such resolutions as "thinly veiled attempts to legitimize Russian disinformation campaigns denigrating neighboring nations and promoting the distorted Soviet narrative of much of contemporary European history, using the cynical guise of halting Nazi glorification".NAFO ('North Atlantic Fellas Organization'), a loose cadre of online 'shitposters' vowing to fight Russian disinformation generally identified by cartoon Shiba Inu dogs in social media, gained notoriety after June 2022, in the wake of a Twitter quarrel with Russian diplomat Mikhail Ulyanov.
Russia–NATO relations
In his speech justifying the invasion of Ukraine, Putin falsely claimed that NATO military infrastructure was being built up inside Ukraine and was a threat to Russia.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov characterized the conflict as a proxy war started by NATO.
He said: "We donot think we're at war with NATO ...
Unfortunately, NATO believes it is at war with Russia".
NATO says it is not at war with Russia; its official policy is that it does not seek confrontation, but rather its members support Ukraine in "its right to self-defense, as enshrined in the UN Charter".
NATO and Russia had co-operated until Russia annexed Crimea.
Former CIA director Leon Panetta told the ABC that the U.S. is 'without question' involved in a proxy war with Russia.
Russian military aircraft flying over the Baltic and Black Seas often do not indicate their position or communicate with air traffic controllers, thus posing a potential risk to civilian airliners.
NATO aircraft scrambled many times to track and intercept these aircraft near alliance airspace.
The Russian aircraft intercepted never entered NATO airspace, and the interceptions were conducted in a safe and routine manner.
Reactions
Reactions to the Russian annexation of Crimea
Ukrainian response ====
Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov accused Russia of "provoking a conflict" by backing the seizure of the Crimean parliament building and other government offices on the Crimean peninsula.
He compared Russia's military actions to the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, when Russian troops occupied parts of the Republic of Georgia and the breakaway enclaves of Abkhazia and South Ossetia were established under the control of Russian-backed administrations.
He called on Putin to withdraw Russian troops from Crimea and stated that Ukraine will "preserve its territory" and "defend its independence".
On 1 March, he warned, "Military intervention would be the beginning of war and the end of any relations between Ukraine and Russia."
On 1 March, Acting President Oleksandr Turchynov placed the Armed Forces of Ukraine on full alert and combat readiness.
The Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs was established by Ukrainian government on 20 April 2016 to manage occupied parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and Crimea regions affected by Russian military intervention of 2014.
NATO and United States military response
On 4 March 2014, the United States pledged $1 billion in aid to Ukraine.
Russia's actions increased tensions in nearby countries historically within its sphere of influence, particularly the Baltic and Moldova.
All have large Russian-speaking populations, and Russian troops are stationed in the breakaway Moldovan territory of Transnistria.
Some devoted resources to increasing defensive capabilities, and many requested increased support from the U.S. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which they had joined in recent years.
The conflict "reinvigorated" NATO, which had been created to face the Soviet Union, but had devoted more resources to "expeditionary missions" in recent years.
In addition to diplomatic support in its conflict with Russia, the U.S. provided Ukraine with US$1.5 billion in military aid during the 2010s.
In 2018 the U.S. House of Representatives passed a provision blocking any training of Azov Battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard by American forces.
In previous years, between 2014 and 2017, the U.S. House of Representatives passed amendments banning support of Azov, but due to pressure from the Pentagon, the amendments were quietly lifted.
Financial markets ====
The initial reaction to the escalation of tensions in Crimea caused the Russian and European stock market to tumble.
The intervention caused the Swiss franc to climb to a 2-year high against the dollar and 1-year high against the Euro.
The Euro and the US dollar both rose, as did the Australian dollar.
The Russian stock market declined by more than 10 percent, while the Russian ruble hit all-time lows against the US dollar and the Euro.
The Russian central bank hiked interest rates and intervened in the foreign exchange markets to the tune of $12 billion to try to stabilize its currency.
Prices for wheat and grain rose, with Ukraine being a major exporter of both crops.
Later in March 2014, the reaction of the financial markets to the Crimea annexation was surprisingly mellow, with global financial markets rising immediately after the referendum held in Crimea, one explanation being that the sanctions were already priced in following the earlier Russian incursion.
Other observers considered that the positive reaction of the global financial markets on Monday 17 March 2014, after the announcement of sanctions against Russia by the EU and the US, revealed that these sanctions were too weak to hurt Russia.
In early August 2014, the German DAX was down by 6 percent for the year, and 11 percent since June, over concerns Russia, Germany's 13th biggest trade partner, would retaliate against sanctions.
Reactions to the war in Donbas
Ukrainian public opinion
A poll of the Ukrainian public, excluding Russian-annexed Crimea, was taken by the International Republican Institute from 12 to 25 September 2014.
89% of those polled opposed 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine.
As broken down by region, 78% of those polled from Eastern Ukraine (including Dnipropetrovsk Oblast) opposed said intervention, along with 89% in Southern Ukraine, 93% in Central Ukraine, and 99% in Western Ukraine.
As broken down by native language, 79% of Russian speakers and 95% of Ukrainian speakers opposed the intervention.
80% of those polled said the country should remain a unitary country.
A poll of the Crimean public in Russian-annexed Crimea was taken by the Ukrainian branch of Germany's biggest market research organization, GfK, on 16–22 January 2015.
According to its results: "Eighty-two percent of those polled said they fully supported Crimea's inclusion in Russia, and another 11 percent expressed partial support.
Only 4 percent spoke out against it."A joint poll conducted by Levada and the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology from September to October 2020 found that in the breakaway regions controlled by the DPR/LPR, just over half of the respondents wanted to join Russia (either with or without some autonomous status) while less than one-tenth wanted independence and 12% wanted reintegration into Ukraine.
It contrasted with respondents in Kyiv-controlled Donbas, where a vast majority felt the separatist regions should be returned to Ukraine.
According to results from Levada in January 2022, roughly 70% of those in the breakaway regions said their territories should become part of the Russian Federation.
Russian public opinion
An August 2014 survey by the Levada Centre reported that only 13% of those Russians polled would support the Russian government in an open war with Ukraine.
Street protests against the war in Ukraine arose in Russia.
Notable protests first occurred in March and large protests occurred in September when "tens of thousands" protested the war in Ukraine with a peace march in downtown Moscow on Sunday, 21 September 2014, "under heavy police supervision".
Reactions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Ukrainian public opinion ====
In March 2022, a week after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, 98% of Ukrainians – including 82% of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine – said they did not believe that any part of Ukraine was rightfully part of Russia, according to Lord Ashcroft's polls which did not include Crimea and the separatist-controlled part of Donbas.
97% of Ukrainians said they had an unfavourable view of Russian President Vladimir Putin, with a further 94% saying they had an unfavourable view of the Russian Armed Forces.
At the end of 2021, 75% of Ukrainians said they had a positive attitude toward ordinary Russians, while in May 2022, 82% of Ukrainians said they had a negative attitude toward ordinary Russians.
Russian public opinion ====
An April 2022 survey by the Levada Centre reported that approximately 74% of the Russians polled supported the "special military operation" in Ukraine, suggesting that Russian public opinion has shifted considerably since 2014.
According to some sources, a reason many Russians supported the "special military operation" has to do with the propaganda and disinformation.
In addition, it has been suggested that some respondents did not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences.
At the end of March, a poll conducted in Russia by the Levada Center concluded the following: When asked why they think the military operation is taking place, respondents said it was to protect and defend civilians, ethnic Russians or Russian speakers in Ukraine (43%), to prevent an attack on Russia (25%), to get rid of nationalists and "denazify" Ukraine (21%), and to incorporate Ukraine or the Donbas region into Russia (3%)."
According to polls, the Russian President's rating rose from 71% on the eve of the invasion to 82% in March 2023.
United States ====
On 28 April 2022, US President Joe Biden asked Congress for an additional $33 billion to assist Ukraine, including $20 billion to provide weapons to Ukraine.
On 5 May, Ukraine's Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal announced that Ukraine had received more than $12 billion worth of weapons and financial aid from Western countries since the start of Russia's invasion on 24 February.
On 21 May 2022, the United States passed legislation providing $40 billion in new military and humanitarian foreign aid to Ukraine, marking a historically large commitment of funds.
In August 2022, U.S. defense spending to counter the Russian war effort exceeded the first 5 years of war costs in Afghanistan.
The Washington Post reported that new U.S. weapons delivered to the Ukrainian war front suggest a closer combat scenario with more casualties.
The United States looks to build "enduring strength in Ukraine" with increased arms shipments and a record-breaking $3 billion military aid package.
Russian military suppliers ====
After expending large amounts of heavy weapons and munitions over months, the Russian Federation received combat drones, loitering munitions, and large amounts of artillery and from Iran, deliveries of tanks and other armoured vehicles from Belarus, and reportedly planned to trade for artillery ammunition from North Korea and ballistic missiles from Iran.
The U.S. has accused China of providing Russia with technology it needs for high-tech weapons, allegations which China has denied.
The U.S. sanctioned a Chinese firm for providing satellite imagery to Russian mercenary forces fighting in Ukraine.
In March 2023, Western nations had pressed the United Arab Emirates to halt re-exports of goods to Russia which had military uses, amidst allegations that the Gulf country exported 158 drones to Russia in 2022.
In May 2023, the U.S. accused South Africa of supplying arms to Russia in a covert naval operation, allegations which have been denied by South African president Cyril Ramaphosa.
See also
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Russia-Ukraine War at the Encyclopædia Britannica
International armed conflict in Ukraine at the Rule of Law in Armed Conflicts Project
Conflict in Ukraine at the Council on Foreign Relations
Russo-Ukrainian War at Google News
War in Ukraine at BBC News Online
Ukraine interactive map at the Live Universal Awareness Map
